Project Gutenberg's The Golden Book of Springfield, by Vachel Lindsay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Golden Book of Springfield

Author: Vachel Lindsay

Release Date: July 5, 2019 [EBook #59860]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN BOOK OF SPRINGFIELD ***

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Transcriber’s Note:

The cover image was created by the transcriber and is placed in the public domain.

THE GOLDEN BOOK OF SPRINGFIELD

LIST OF THE BOOKS OF VACHEL LINDSAY

Prose:—

A Handy Guide for Beggars.

Adventures While Preaching the Gospel of
Beauty.

The Art of the Moving Picture.

The Golden Book of Springfield.

Verse:—

General William Booth Enters Into Heaven
and Other Poems.

The Congo and Other Poems.

The Chinese Nightingale and Other Poems.

The Golden Whales of California and Other
Rhymes in the American Language.

THE GOLDEN BOOK OF SPRINGFIELD

BY

VACHEL LINDSAY

A CITIZEN OF THAT TOWN

Being the review of a book that will appear in the autumn of the year 2018, and an extended description of Springfield, Illinois, in that year.

New York

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

1920

All rights reserved

Copyright, 1920

By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

Set up and electrotyped. Published October, 1920.

III

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter

Page

I.

The Campbellite, the Florist and the Hostess

3

II.

The Prognosticator’s Club

10

III.

How People of 1920 Think the Book Will Come, in 2018

19

IV.

History of the Michaels

49

V.

I Myself Enter into the Springfield of 2018

66

VI.

Kopensky Versus Boone

90

VII.

The Drug Stores, Coffee Houses and Dance Halls

103

VIII.

The Springfield Flag

117

IX.

The Beginning of the Flying Machine Riots

137

X.

The End of the Flying Machine Riots

154

XI.

St. Friend, and His Two Religious Orders

171

XII.

The Yellow Dance Halls Are Abolished

192

XIII.

Surto Hurdenburg is Lynched

209

XIV.

In the House of the Man From Singapore

226

XV.

Further Experiences in That Strange Mansion

243

XVI.

The Return of Joseph Bartholdi Michael

266

XVII.

The Lynching of Boone. An interregnum of the Diary. How The Golden Book Appears

287

XVIII.

St. Friend and Avanel Read From The Golden Book

305

XIX.

Avanel and I Ascend to the Jungles of Heaven

318

IV

THE PROGNOSTICATOR’S CLUB

1920

2018

David Carson, Campbellite minister,

becomes St. Friend

Anne Morrison, a florist,

becomes Roxana Grey

Eloise Terry, the hostess,

becomes Patricia Anthony

Clara Horton, a school teacher,

becomes Josephine Windom

Gregory Webster, an artist,

becomes Sparrow Short

Nathan Levi, a Jewish boy,

becomes Rabbi Terence Ezekiel

Margaret Evans, a Christian Scientist,

becomes Rachel Madison

Daisy Pearl Johnson, a negress,

becomes Mary Timmons

Nathaniel Davidson, an evangelist,

becomes Cave Man Thomas

Ruth Everett, a welfare worker,

becomes Gwendolyn Charles

John Fletcher, the doubter,

becomes Dr. Mayo Sims

Joseph Bartholdi Michael, I,

becomes Joseph Bartholdi Michael, II

THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED TO ISADORA

3

CHAPTER I

THE CAMPBELLITE, THE FLORIST AND THE HOSTESS

In this, our town, we call “New Springfield,”
David Carson, a young minister of the
Disciples of Christ is a near neighbor of mine.
He is a graduate of Bethany College. His
great-grandfather studied there before him,
when Alexander Campbell, the founder of
Bethany, was in his prime. If you want to
know of this man as we know him, read Richardson’s
staid old biography, or walk the
shades of Bethany, West Virginia. Campbell,
in our eyes, was the American pioneer theologian.

He was devoted to the union of the churches
of Christendom. He pleaded that all disciples
of Christ call themselves “simply” Christians,
and unite on those symbols and ordinances
which Christendom has in common.
If it would not make our great-grandfathers
turn over in their graves, I and my neighbor
would call ourselves “simply” Campbellites.
We would do it for a human, and not lofty
reason. It seems that those spiritually or
physically descended from the early Campbellites

4
are on family terms, no matter how
they seem to roam in thought or experience,
or no matter what their hereditary argumentative
disposition. For a “Campbellite” is
sure to argue, on the least provocation. There
are traces of this tendency even in Richardson’s
reverent biography.

Ultra modern followers of Campbell hang
in their libraries with unlimited pride a certain
Rembrandtesque lithograph of the great
man, an heirloom that is now quite rare, and
to be classed in its southern way, as the spinning wheels
and old Bibles of the Mayflower
are classed in a northern way. This lithograph
is the enlargement of the engraving in the
front of the Richardson biography, but much
color and magic have been added. Out of the
darkness emerges a smooth-shaven, high bred,
masterful physiognomy more like that of the
statesmen who were the fathers of the republic,
than of a member of any priesthood.
Campbell’s cheeks and eyes are still fired
with youth and authority militant. He has a
head bowed with thought, crowned with grey
hair, and beneath his chin is the most statesmanlike
of cravats, with a peculiarly old-fashioned
roll. Thus he must have looked,
at the height of debate with the infidel.

This is the man who put so much learning,

5
and deathless controversy, and high distinction
into the log cabins of the Ohio river
basin, especially the romantic regions of
Mason and Dixon’s line. On west of the Mississippi
his followers carried his light to
Seattle, Portland, and Los Angeles, and
the cities of Alaska and Canada and the farms
between. And they start ’round the world
with it all over again at this hour. Yet in
the end that light is apt to have a color of its
origin, touched with Virginia, West Virginia,
and Kentucky;—a southern gospel, far indeed
from Plymouth Rock, or Manhattan Island.

I can never forget the copy of the lithograph
that hung over my grandmother’s
front room fireplace in the patriarchal Frazee
farm house in Indiana. Under it I heard
proverbs from Campbell every summer, from
the time I can remember anything. All those
sayings were mixed up with stories that came
with my people along the old Daniel Boone
trail from Kentucky and Virginia. And when
that old frame house was new and novel, and
most other dwelling houses near were log
cabins, Campbell had been a guest received
with breathless reverence. Under that picture
I was personally conducted through all the
daguerreotypes and records pertaining to the
Kentucky pioneers of our blood.

6
And now, in Springfield, under the same
rich lithograph my neighbor keeps the bound
volumes of Campbell’s
Christian Baptist
and

Millenial Harbinger
, once the arsenal of every
debating “elder” of our persuasion. My
grandfather’s copies were marked, every
page, and these are marked by my radical
friend, but with a different point of view.

On a certain evening I am in the pastor’s
study tracing with astonishment the suggestion
of Christian Socialism in the first number
of the
Harbinger
. My Grandma had said
nothing about
that
!

Few of Campbell’s older followers dwell on
the hope of a practical City of God that
shouted from the covers even before they
were opened. This reasonable, non-miraculous
millennium is much in the mind of my neighbor,
and he tells me again and again of a
vision that he has of Springfield a hundred
years hence. But more of this later.

There is a woman who is florist of our town,
Anne Morrison a descendant of the Chapman
family. She holds in special reverence, John
Chapman, (Johnny Appleseed,) who began
his labors in a region a little north of Alexander
Campbell’s diocese, in the Ohio basin. He
remains a tradition among the more northern
group of those who worshipped Campbell, and

7
among similar pioneers. He is especially
honored by that splendid sect, the Swedenborgians,
for he was a preacher and teacher
of the doctrines of Swedenborg. But he was
even more notably a nurseryman. He was
deserving of the laurels of Thoreau, three
times and more, and by the test of life rather
than writing, to him belongs nearly every
worth-while crown of Whitman. He skirmished
on the very edge of the frontier, but
fought the wilderness, not the Indian. The
aborigines thought him a great medicine man
and holy man, because of his magical bag of
seeds, for along their trails, wherever he
tramped, there soon came up pennyroyal and
all beneficent herbs. With the tenderness of
St. Francis he wept over every wounded bird,
and with the steadiness of a nation builder,
he planted orchards of apples in the openings
of the forest, fenced them in, and left them
for the pioneers to find, long after. He wore
for a shirt and sole article of clothing an old
gunny-sack with holes cut for arms and legs,
and winter or summer slept in the hollow tree
on the pile of old leaves, and weathered it
past seventy years, while the great Whitman
lived in houses, and Thoreau was on Walden
but a season or two. These men left behind
them certain writings, but Johnny Appleseed

8
left behind him apples, orchards heavy with
fruit, beauty from the very black earth, and
a tradition whose wonder shall yet ring
through all the palaces of mankind. He was
swift as the deer, and gentle as the fawn,—and
stern with himself, as the Red Indian.
Like Christ and Socrates he wrote only in the
soil. He was welcomed more like an angel than
a man in the pioneer cabins, and if ever there
was an American saint left uncanonized in
1920, it is John Chapman, Johnny Appleseed,
and by 2018 he is canonized indeed, and has
his niche in the Springfield Cathedral, according
to Anne Morrison’s revelation.

Another friend is a great hostess of Springfield,
Eloise Terry, by name. Her enemies declare
that she is the representative of her
family fortune, and little else. But they are
apt to be people who do not attend her quite
earnest parties, where every ramification of
the social fabric is candidly examined, at
least for one evening. The most competent
person is brought in to speak of his strand of
the web, be he bootblack or jailbird or poet.
But this is an advance on her family who are
dully conventional, to the core of their souls.
And her constant companions, though they
are in fact people of the same general stratification
of good fortune as herself, are selected

9
for their human interest in her unconsciously
inhuman inquisitions. And inquisitions, after
all, come but once a month or so. In general
she and her cronies are taking a decent part
in politics, and their wealth does not interfere
with an unprejudiced estimate of candidates,
entirely apart from bank accounts. Her presence
in town makes for the truth, and for
progress that much. Liars hate her intensely.
Petty political lies fade before her, however
poor her remedies may be for the great lies.
She is a golden-haired girl, around thirty
years of age, with three thriving and well-reared
children. Her distinction, in my eyes,
is not her opinions, but the fact that she
dresses in schemes allied to the gold of her
hair. I meet her on the street like a bit of
blessed sunshine. Also her heart is quite
warm. If she had been a musician, instead
of a kind of contemporary conversational historian,
she would have talked of music, instead
of events, with the same ardor and fine
tone, to a similar circle of friends, and brought
in the singers, to sing for them, from the very
gutters if necessary, and have been as decent
to such songbirds as she knew how.

10

CHAPTER II

THE PROGNOSTICATOR’S CLUB

The young disciple minister and I decide
that the people of Springfield who see the
vision of the city of the future should be
brought together, and we write some carefully
worded invitations. We organize a Prognosticator’s
Club and meet in the Sun Parlor of the
Leland Hotel.

One of the first to join, after our florist
friend and the great hostess of Springfield, is
John Fletcher, a Doubter. He is a person in
whom we place much confidence in practical
affairs. He is high authority in the financial
circles of Springfield. He is religious, on Sunday
only, from eleven till twelve-thirty, when
he sits in his pew. He represents the present
State House view which takes for granted
that the fewer ideas men have the better,
if only the crowd in power “get theirs.”
The general assumption is:—politics is business
and business is politics and the only
worth while citizens are those that “get
the money,” and, of course, those others who
keep it safely and who correctly add the accounts
till the money is wanted. They hate
any new current in any party. And they
hate the idea of any clan wanting anything

11
except established well-dressed bank
accounts to rule the city. Children are sent to
universities to polish their manners, but not
to bring back any changed thoughts on these
subjects.

The gentleman who incarnates this dream
lives in the north, is therefore a Republican.
He is quite sure the Emancipation Proclamation
meant that millionaires are exempt from
criticism, except from other millionaires or
their shrewedest lackeys, and that the Emancipation
Proclamation was sent forth into the
world to establish more thoroughly the lackey,
the toady, the tuft hunter, the snob, the
bootlicker, and the parasite, in the service of
the stupidest holders of money and land. He
will defend this position quite ardently, almost
in those terms, and he is quite sure that
anyone who protests against his views is a
“red.” And “red,” “radical,” “anarchist,”
and “liberal” are absolutely synonymous, according
to his thinking. He is sure that anyone
who does not want to be a millionaire or
serve one well is contemplating arson. He is
quite sure that every large bank account is
automatically moral, that every small one is
almost moral, and the one crime is to be without
money. He is quite convinced that Abraham
Lincoln died to establish such ideals

12
more firmly in the Republican Party, and
when he is in the South he maintains that
Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson lived
and toiled and suffered to establish them in
the Democratic Party, and did it with eminent
success: that all other notions have
been recently imported from the shameful
streets of Russia. When he sent his son to
college he urged him to spend money on the
conservative professors and their sons and
daughters, and to put the radical professors
in bad odor with the “best fellows,” and get
them fired as soon as the trustees would listen
to one so young.

All this point of view is in my friend’s
tone of voice and gesture. He has inherited
part of his money, and married the rest, and
the income pays for a good caretaker. He
himself is a physician for the most extensively
landed families in central Illinois. He dresses
well, so people think he knows all about medicine.
He is squarely set, has a heavy jaw, a
steadying manner, a kindly disposition, pays
the best salaries to his office boy and secretaries
and the people who work his farms.
He has the greatest aversion to oaths, bad
manners, adultery, and has a literary turn.
Though he looks like an old prize fighter with
a touch of deacon-sleekness, he reads Montaigne,

13
Lord Chesterfield, Thackeray, Shakespeare,
and the like. He enjoys discussing in
the most sympathetic way every human trait
that has to do with purely domestic dramatic
and personal emotions. His wife is a valiant
Daughter of the American Revolution
and his daughter belongs to the most snobbish
sorority to be discovered for miles. He
has been “right in the wagon” whenever a
bit of near royalty has passed through
Springfield, and his manner though blunt,
was deferential. His wildest turn is for radical
painters, and he has the best collection
west of the Hudson of the now forgotten
cubists.

Of far different sort is the next member of
our Club. She is of the fine nerved creatures of
this world, a spring beauty in whose conversation
I take delight. She is a teacher in one of
the Springfield ward schools, and a sober little
reader of
The Atlantic Monthly
, and we quarrel
a bit about that. But her taste there represents
her desire for fine grained English whatever
the thought conveyed. When Clara
Horton takes delight in life, it comes in a
flash that sets her friends aflame. The school
marm is gone. She ceases to admonish me.
The imaginary eyes of her censorious pupils
are banished, and I am no longer a pupil, and

14
she is the daughter of a nymph of the most
delicate mood and a faun of the gentlest sort.
Her whole physical fabric is aglow with the
idea of the book or the event or the mere
day’s sunshine or tomorrow’s movie. Her
skin shows the whiteness of a stock that has
been too inbred for many generations for complete
vigor, the gentle nymph and the gentle
faun met too often, and there were not quite
enough bullies or peasants among her far
European ancestors. Her people have been
for many generations in America. Every line
of her family, north and south, has been remembered
with the greatest comprehension
of every taste and impulse. She gets her
silky black hair from one grandmother, and
her thousand dimples from another no doubt.
She openly hates the complacency of our
“first families.” Ideas go pouring through
her head, all the time.

As for the families representing the defended
and entrenched fortunes of Springfield,
theirs is still the practice of keeping
their children out of public school, for fear
of contamination with teachers who read such
papers as
The Atlantic Monthly
, and other
vulgar publications. The children must be sent
off to teachers who flatter and flatter and flatter.

15
But we do not talk about these matters
generally. We talk about New Springfield.

The Prognosticators discover that still
others have been dreaming joyfully all alone
of the future of Springfield. One fiery artist
of our town brings in quite definite testimony.
He was born in the village of Rochester, near
to Springfield, but has no sign in his manner
of being a citizen of the United States. Quite
an old man, Gregory Webster has the ways
of boulevard heroes of Paris who swung
their canes like swashbucklers, among the
cafes, in 1876. He speaks English with
a French accent. Yet he has been a tremendous
force for good in the history of
American Art. Thousands upon thousands of
pupils have passed through his studios. He
has been a courageous patron of young artists.
With infallible taste he has purchased their
best pictures, as soon as their pictures were
good, thereby giving them reputations twenty
years sooner, and himself “going broke.”
He has championed the most elegant craftsmanship.
In torrents of tireless language,
with an unflagging zeal and animation, he has
talked down and out the cheap and popular
conception of the uses of art. He has exalted
the great portrait masters. He has exalted
brushwork and drawing into a ritual, and

16
good color into a finality of the soul. He has
been marvelously generous in his sympathy
and his patience with budding talent, and
therefore the artists’ aspiration of America
for a whole generation has come to his front
door. He is, in actual subject matter, in his
own pictures an unimaginative creature. He
is able to paint fishes better than men and
rabbits better than women, and yet, since he
painted fishes and rabbits with Olympian
finality, they have been enshrined in the highest
galleries of the world next to portraits of
human creatures by Rembrandt and Hals and
Velasquez.

A stranger to these others comes to me.
Nathan Levi, son of one of the Rabbis
of our tiny Springfield Ghetto. He at once
wins my heart. I have always found myself
in peculiar sympathy with the Jews. Once
past the moment of shyly seeking my confidence,
he is full of the Jewish expressiveness
and demonstration. He is astonished beyond
measure to discover a double consciousness
within himself. In this century he is as orthodox
as his father, and a young man devoted
to the routine of the pawn shop. In 2018 he is
in a hundred ways opposite.

Another newcomer, Margaret Evans, is a

17
Christian Science Reader. She is beautiful, in
this day, and though she does not speak of
her mirror in 2018, as does the headlong Jewish
boy, I know she will always be beautiful in
body and soul. She has fathomed the holy
grace and immortal gladness of her teaching,
and I can well believe she is immortal in this
place, under our oak and apple trees.

Still another is a Springfield Negress who
is a preacher among her own people. She has
not a single Caucasian contour to her face or
figure, yet all the world must admit that
Daisy Pearl Johnson is beautiful as she is
divinely young. She is “black but comely,”
according to the scripture. And she is eager
in all the matters of the mind and spirit.

Another prophet, Nathaniel Davidson,
gathers several denominations under one
temporary roof, and preaches to them about
hell. He was once a Y. M. C. A. physical director,
and he ranges in attributes from Caliban
to higher things, and looks much like
Douglas Fairbanks and William. A. Sunday.
He receives an invitation to join the Prognosticator’s
Club.

Then there is a woman who was a welfare
worker in France. Ruth Everett has such
a sleek and sophisticated grace, and her
face is so snobbish yet so Alexandrian Greek

18
that I have often called her “The Daughter
of Lysippus.” In every line is the elegance
that old sculptor might have loved. In pomp,
upon her throne, and she makes any chair her
throne, she is like “Sara Siddons as the
Tragic Muse” as painted by Sir Joshua
Reynolds.

And here you have men and women who
see the vision, each in a strange and mystical
fashion.

19

CHAPTER III

HOW PEOPLE OF 1920 THINK THE GOLDEN BOOK WILL COME IN 2018

When we, the Prognosticator’s Club, come
together for our meetings it is inevitable
that our talk should be of the Springfield of
our fancy and of the manner in which the
vision has come to each one.

The first to testify, when we call the
members together in the Sun Parlor of the
Leland Hotel is the young Campbellite minister.
He tells us of a dream that has come to
him on many evenings by his study fire.

In a vision he is reborn three or four generations
in the future. He is a priest of the
Catholic Church. He is known as St. Friend,
the Giver of Bread. He is almost alone in a
vast Gothic Cathedral. He is astonished to
find himself changed in body, conviction, and
habit from all his former routine, but enough
memory remains for the comparison, and he
knows he is still himself. But of this another
time.

There are a few people praying at the stations

20
of the cross, in this, Springfield’s new
church of St. Peter and St. Paul, on the old
site of Sixth and Reynold’s Streets. The time
is All Saint’s Day, Anno Domini, 2018. As he
tells us the story, the very picture springs before
me in elaborate detail, as though I witnessed
the event in my own person. The
church is indeed gigantic for so small a town
to build, and in many particulars as well as
general type it is like Notre Dame, Paris. We
behold with him how a book of air, gleaming
with spiritual gold, comes flying in through
the walls as though they were but shadows.
It is a book open as it soars, and every fluttering
page is richly bordered and illuminated.
It has wings of black, and above them wings
of azure. Long feathers radiate from the
whirring, soaring pennons. The book circles
above the heads of the congregation. From
the sky comes music incredibly sweet.

The book flies toward the altar, where St.
Friend finds himself standing. The wings
fade. This day moves with rapid breath. The
congregation has been trooping in as the visitant
from the world of spirit-wonder has been
settling into its own holy place on the altar.

Now St. Friend is in the act of reading the
gleaming volume. It is a book of homilies,
addressed directly to New Springfield. Day

21
after day the whole population flocks to the
cathedral to hear, in the blazing kaleidoscopic
costumes of that time,—all kinds of people,
saints and sinners. But to speak briefly of the
essential story, the town is transfigured and
redeemed beyond any merely mundane plan.
And so we call 2018 the Mystic Year, and give
it other honorable titles of similar import.
For the town, then, becomes half-way millennial.
Of these qualified but stirring wonders,
another time. Let us turn for the moment to
the second witness, and hear her version of the
appearance of the Golden Book.

The florist had already revealed to me, when
I was buying red roses in her gorgeous greenhouse,
that she had a strange recurrent picture
of the days of Johnny Appleseed’s triumph
going through her head. She repeats
her story to the other members of the club.

It is of Anno Domini 2018, and though she
is still a florist she wears her rue with a difference.
She finds herself the exponent of a
religion of flowers. Her name is Roxana Grey.
She is daughter of a “Mother Grey,” who
was in like manner daughter of a “Mother
Grey.” There is much interesting detail irrelevant
to the present point, but I may say
she is first moved to tell me the story because
she finds my name on the roll of the backsliders

22
among the devotees of this 2018 religion
of flowers. She has a double consciousness
that keeps a mind in both periods, but is
surprised to find both my name and my very
self in the new time.

But as to Johnny Appleseed, which is more
to the point of this chapter, she is most uplifted
of heart to find that he at last comes
into his own in our city and his name is whispered
there perpetually.

In his name Springfield has developed the
great Amaranth Apple Orchards; it is said,
from seeds he gave in his lifetime to a certain
pioneer, Hunter Kelly. And it is taught in
his name, or with the mood he engenders in
our hearts, that he who eats of the Amaranth
Apple is filled with a love of eternal beauty,
and it is used as the City’s understood symbol
of beauty.

Then there is a teaching in his name that he
who, after certain prayers, eats of certain
acorns, or walks under the oak saplings
that come from them, accepts in some sense
promptings toward eternal goodness. It has
come about that eating the acorn, is the city’s
accepted metaphor for the search for righteousness.
The earlier devotees of the oak,
planted a notable group that have of late
grown taller than the California redwoods.

23
They are in a complete circle of twelve, surrounding
the very edges of the city. The
first two, which are the tallest, are by the
inside northwest gate, put there long before
there was any gate, by Hunter Kelly, of
whom more hereafter. But these oaks, the
pillars of Springfield’s temple-cathedral-synagogue,
whose roof is the sky, are made the
theme of many varieties of teaching, all of
which goes back to Johnny Appleseed, who
gave to Hunter Kelly the original acorns that
made the trees of Oak Ridge, and these pillar
oaks as well.

There is another teaching, abroad in
Springfield, 2018, the teaching of Democracy,
of which the Symbol is the Golden
Rain-Tree brought from New Harmony, Indiana.
It is said in Springfield, and taught
with especial emphasis by the devotees of the
Flower Religion, that he who enters under
the shade of the Rain-Tree boughs and leaves
and flowers, enters the gate of eternal democracy,
and so the trees are often called
Gate-Trees.

And then having told us so much, my friend
speaks again and shows to our spirit eyes an
out-of-door statue of John Chapman, Johnny
Appleseed, near which she finds herself just
before sunrise of All Saint’s Day, Anno

24
Domini, 2018. Roxana is there to watch for
the dawn. She walks alone, according to the
discipline, saying certain prayers. The park
is on the edge of the Governor’s yard.

A great rose-colored, egg-shaped boulder is
dug from the midst of the lawn of the Governor’s
yard. She hides in a clump of bushes
to watch; for the digging is by no mortal
hand, but by spiritual presences which are
the souls of the primeval trees of the city,
looming, whispering, rustling above the place.
Then the boulder is there, rolled over on the
grass, and a bolt from the clear starry heaven
strikes it. The book comes flying forth. It
has the same airy, other-worldly presence and
power as when described by the first witness.
But it soars to the Shrine of Flowers consecrated
to the especial sect and the esoteric
teachings of Roxana Grey and her immediate
predecessors. But she does not know where
it has gone, it has circled and wandered so,
appearing and disappearing. And it is with
a tremendous leaping of the heart she finds it
next day on her altar with wings gone but
with pages open to be read to the faithful.
Its main themes are the teachings of the trees,
of which we have spoken, woven with her own
traditional doctrines of the flowers, but all
these teachings in most heightened and glorified

25
aspects. Along the margins are old texts
from the special books of her shrine, and from
Swedenborg and the Old and New Testaments.

When the great hostess of Springfield begins
her testimony my first question, since I
am but a man, is whether her hair in 2018
gleams with the same darling golden hue.

And have the red-haired girls the courage
to dress like daffodils, in 2018? She insists I
am the wicked one to be pressing this devilish
investigation, when there are rarer things to
impart,—but in the glad Mystic Year, since
I must know, she is endowed with the hair of
what might be called her 1920 Grandmother-self,
and the only change she notices is a more
painful tendency to freckles, from riding
horseback in a certain notable cavalry, behind
a certain young lady commander, Avanel
Boone,—of whom more anon.

The most important revelation to her, sociologically,
is that she finds herself no longer
one of “our best people.” That is, she has
not much money, and no privilege of collecting
rents in the style that is now the sole
reason many of the “old families” are in
Springfield for a part of the year. She is in
Springfield because she loves a certain factory.
She loves it because she is Patricia

26
Anthony, forewoman, and can order people
about. Her factory is at Ninth and Converse
Streets, on the same ground with The Illinois
Watch Company and The Sangamon Electric
Company. It is a place where telescopic and
microscopic lenses are made. As for the Golden
Book about which she is all aquiver, she finds
the volume when she is inspecting the place in
the late afternoon of All Saint’s Day, Anno
Domini, 2018. She says I am there with her,
carrying on, as of old, in the same conceited,
philandering way. I am helping take inventory
of the supplies needed for the next week,
as my excuse for the tour. The factory echoes
hollow with our solitary steps. Indeed it
takes her aback to meet the book in such an
off-hand, teasing moment.

But there is The Golden Book. Every
transparent page, which flutters as though
with the gusty thoughts of our spirits, is
written in letters of fire. On the first leaf is
an inscription delivering the work to her by
name: “Patricia Anthony.”

She was always a conceited woman, and
here is the first thing that ever happened to
her to justify it, I say to her, speaking as one
1920 person to another.

But on, to 2018: For all the Golden Book
is penned so gorgeously, the discussion is

27
largely economic. There are citations from
Adam Smith, Karl Marx, Henry George, and
on, forward, to Joseph Bartholdi Michael the
second, and Black Hawk Boone,—Springfield
sages of 2018. All these are cited to corroborate,
in various items, piecemeal, an absolutely
new economic remedy for the world.

Patricia sees herself reading the volume
to the workers, through the lunch hour. The
book keeps its wings. Often, as though stirred
with divine impatience, it dashes and flutters
on through the walls, as though they were
shadows, then comes soaring back again.
Each time it returns the work is re-opened,
at the first page, and newer and more difficult
teaching is written there, till the volume is
no longer economic. It is as though a work by
Henry George had been changed into a work
by Swedenborg! Now it shows how to make
microscopes that will enable all Springfield
to find the fairies of the fairies, and telescopes
that will discover the angels that guard the
angels. At last the book instructs the devout
how to woo and win these creatures, without
turning upon them any glass of cold scrutiny,
how to see them with the natural eye, and
touch them with the natural hand.

The little school teacher finds herself reborn
in 2018 as head of the three-color printing department

28
of the school where she teaches. In
the reincarnation she bears the name of
Josephine Windom. She stands helpless when
a Rock and Kopensky mob, and children of
Doctor Mayo Sims seize the winged volume
from the altar of St. Friend, apparently
against its will, like a hundred men binding
an angel. Near the market house between
Fourth and Fifth on Monroe they pile firewood
upon the book. They pour on oil. They
light the pyre. All is turned to ashes. Later
a band of Municipal University rescuers arrives.
They are led by her assistant in the
color printing department, Horace Andrews.

Slowly as though greeting this band the
flames renew themselves, and take form.
There is the book again, but four times as
large, with wings, binding, leaves, and letters
of fire. Then suddenly it is flying above the
city. Its covers are of the iridescence of a
shell, with a golden shimmering. The wings
are music making.

The book is a friend of men. It is disposed
to descend to its friends. It is carried in flying
and fluttering state to the three-color printing
department of the school, where hundreds
of rainbow replicas of the pages are made,
though not on this earth can replicas of the
wings be made. And while the book is within

29
the four walls, the school becomes a place
of fairyland. Every cottage has its own copy
of the volume in time. Edition after edition
goes out, first from the school, then from the
greater, more dazzling printing presses of the
University, to the scholars and artists of Europe
and Asia, through their colleagues who
are attending the World’s Fair of the University
of Springfield. But the book itself, having
once been copied in the printing room there,
flies around the Truth Tower, the center of
town; it goes up in higher and wider circles.
At last it is seen, a star among the stars.
Meanwhile the transfiguration of the city
begins.

The future plays a curious trick with our
artist friend, the valiant and patriotic American
who sent forth all his sons against the
Germans. He is astonished to find himself
reborn a pacifist, Anno Domini, 2018. And
there are other sad changes. He sees himself
in a mirror as a long-haired creature, a
ragged libel of the William Cullen Bryant
type, with similar features, but dressed in
ready made garments, and with much food
spilled down the front of his vest. His nickname
in 2018 is “Old Sparrow Short,” because
at that time the sparrow is his favorite
bird, and because he is tall. This increased

30
height is the only concession to his vanity in
the revelation, for in 1920 he has been obliged
to stand on his toes over and over, to give
any impression of height.

In 2018, though a pacifist, he is still militant
in the aesthetic field. He is a leader of a group
of young Springfield painters, sculptors, and
architects who are always dynamiting our
stagnant exhibitions with appropriate bombs
of paint. He insists it is the painting and
sculpture of his followers that make Springfield
such a dazzling success. He is still the
head teacher of the Springfield Art Association
which has its headquarters at the
Edwards Place on North Fifth, as of old.

His political hobby in 2018 is that we
should return to the glory of the ancient time
of the unchained nations, especially, as he
hears himself say, the era of peace and good
will when the Czar instituted the Hague tribunal,
and Andrew Carnegie sent out his
peace lecturers. He is sent to our local World
Government prison which is built across the
street from the City and County Jails on Seventh
and Jefferson Streets. He is here locked
up for emphasizing his views to the point of
world-treason. The book flies in through the
walls of his cell as though those walls were
shadows, and as though the book were made

31
of but air and sunshine, woven together. He
who is doomed to become this awful Sparrow
Short declares that the principal mandate of
the volume is for the immediate dissolution of
the entire International Government. It demands
a restoration of the conditions of 1913.
The mandate of the volume for the artist is
the same as for the nation. “
Live like the
Sparrow. Be yourself completely. Utter your
soul, regardless of cost.
” This condition, universally
accepted, will secure a real world-peace,
and one that is not hypocrisy or oppression.

It comes the turn of the Jewish boy I
so much admire. He says that in 2018 he is
“Rabbi Terence Ezekiel,” a rank heretic,
and an old man. He dreams of himself as
being the grandson and the son of two other
Rabbis of the same name and as having a
rebel congregation all his own in 2018, of
being in their estimation and that of many
others, the leading citizen of the community.
His temple is on the site of the old Isador
Kanner Synagogue. He it is, who, as the
leading champion of the aggrandizement of
the photoplay as a general social factor, fights
his best chum, St. Friend, when films are a
public issue, because St. Friend preaches
against them from the Cathedral. No longer

32
is his life the slow, devious midnight-lamp
technique of the pawnshop, the furtive, the
futile, the too confidential. Not his the bad
street abounding in second-hand stores and
cheap rooming lofts.

To his temple come the wise of all the
world, and there is preached the gospel of
righteousness as symbolized by the planting
all around the world of the Ezekiel Oak (for
thus he has taken a leaf from the testimony of
Roxana Grey), and the distribution of all
other great trees, including the Golden Rain-Tree
and the Apple Amaranth. But within
this wave of beneficence his sect has a peculiar
and especial discipline, as rigid and elaborate
as Leviticus, which is, in another set of
forms, essentially the same curious flowering
of the Jewish mind on the same general level
of the soul. When he looks into the glass he
sees, in 1920, a young rascal who has stooped
shoulders, from long bending over the jewelry
and watches he has mended. He sees dull-brown
hair and eyes, a blank face, a heavy
jaundiced skin, all of which give the lie to the
great brain. And he is five feet in height.

In 2018 he is six feet four, an old man, but
with a blazing eye and a voice like the surf
in a storm. His hair is brilliant black, his face
is that of the Arabian war horse and the

33
American eagle. Into his temple come all the
wise of the world, week after week, and he
introduces them, and they speak to his people
and the rest. But he is to deliver his own discourse
on a certain day in the autumn of the
Mystic Year. It is a little before the beginning
of the services. Amid faint music from
afar the light before the doors of the tabernacle
is suddenly enriched in color and splendor.
The holy doors swing open with a noble
deliberation, and there, instead of the Torah,
is The Book of Air and Wonder,—The Golden
Book, poised like a cloud and a moon and a
bird. It has six wings, woven from the rays
of a strange moonrise, perhaps like the wings
of the cherubim, that bent above the ark long
ago. The book settles on the desk. The pennons
fade. The volume is open at the beginning
of a series of prophecies about the soul
of Springfield, as though Springfield were a
living personality and not a mere assembly of
citizens, and as though the book were a person,
and not mere wings of air.

He tells us that he sees a face much like
mine in the assembly of 2018, and I have not
changed, but have the same yellow hair and
pale face, as he says, “still look like a
Swede,” and, (as he insists, with the pawnbroker’s
emphasis on material texture), I

34
wear the same suit of clothes, and carry the
same iron and leather cane.

And so he tells  us his tale of double consciousness,
with the honest glow of the
blood that I love in all leaders of his race,
with that thick fire which no other race can
equal. His synagogue is rebuilt on a vast
scale in 2018 to hold Golden Book devotees;
And this is but the beginning of his history
of great affairs in Springfield.

The Christian Science Reader says she
sees my face in the Sunday morning
Christian Science congregation of her vision.
We are one and all given new names.
Her name in 2018 is Rachel Madison, and,
though I am not of her faith today, in the
new time I have grown toward this light, and
she sees me with my unfortunate yellow hair
and my iron cane, for all the world as the
young pawnbroker does, but sitting in the
back of the Christian Science temple listening
attentively, Sunday after Sunday. She says
that it is a silver book that we see upon the
great day of November 1st, 2018. It sheds an
ineffable white light, it is almost as impalpable
as a comet in the sky, yet a substance
that comes flying through the walls as though
they were but gleaming shadows. The air
is filled with music from all the high heavens.

35
The book spreads six wings, like those of
celestial swans. The pages have no illuminations
or other abominable traces of the Gothic.

The book circles above the ecstatic and
transfixed assembly, then it settles upon the
desk between the two older books there, and
in its presence they become like itself, books
of air.

And so she reads to the people, with the
other reader, who stands beside her according
to old custom. They read as though by
long understanding, but actually led as in a
trance, through alternate pages of the three
books.

Almost in a day the church is rebuilt. It
becomes a tremendous white dome, a house
of devotion, where the whole city worships
as one soul. Then begins the one new evolution
of the town toward healing, and the
peace of the clear sky.

The negress who sees prophetic visions is
easily persuaded to add her testimony about
the book. Her name in 2018 is Mary Timmons,
and she is nicknamed “Pious Mary.”
She is most voluble concerning the wonders of
the new time. But to the matter of the book
at once. She finds herself in her church, in
the place where the Baptist Evangelical
chapel stood a century before. And it is still

36
called the “Baptist Evangelical.” The house
of worship is now gorgeous with curious jungle-mooded
ornaments, pillars which are so
carved as to seem moss-hung and vine-wound.
It is as though we were in the shade of things
too high for man. All this house of worship
has been evolved by her cousin, the great
architect John Emis, who is also a member
of this congregation, and a powerful exhorter
among his own people, despite all his world
fame among paler races. It is in the midst
of his designs she moves, on this great day.
With pentecostal power her people are singing
“Swing Low, Sweet Chariot.” While the
faces are uplifted, the book of air, the book
that gleams with spiritual gold, flies in
through the walls as though they were but
shadows. There is a mighty glory shout from
the congregation. It is, according to Mary
Timmons, answered by music from “the
highest sanctorium of the meridian sky.”
There are twenty heavenly doves soaring in
a circle around the book. Outside of them is
a circle of robins. All these birds fly through
the walls and away, while the book settles
upon the reading desk. The wings do not
fade, but cover the pulpit with plumes of
azure, plumes of ebony, peacock feathers,

37
each with three eyes, and long feathery golden
threads that are spreading and scattering like
loose silk. Yet these things seem but as clouds
spun by necromancy and as words of the
angels made visible.

Then Mary Timmons takes a strange turn,
and insists it is, after all, only a copy of the
Bible, open at the Beatitudes. Glorified in
this way it brings about the higher emancipation
of her people. Beginning with this congregation
they are stirred to the depths of
their more creative selves. Devout composers,
the kind that once gave birth to one line
spirituals, sung like “rounds,” now develop
epic forms of composition that are allied to
these, so that great and musical shouts echo
from mouth to mouth and breast to breast
with three hundred singing, and then the
whole African race singing. And instead of
simply expressing the massed devotion of
Africa, as of old, these more personal spirituals
record the lyric cry of this or that black
poet. Africa-in-America now sings the special
story of the black statesman, the black
farmer, or even the devout architect John
Emis and the like. And the people and race
of Mary Timmons, once natural orators, but
no one a better creator than another, suddenly

38
flower individually. Their genius becomes
intensely centered in a few, and there
are speakers with definite, individual messages,
who shout not only wonderful round
rolling words, but phrases with whip lash and
sentences with sword edge, in orations as individual
as the world demands that art shall
be. The African man with the soul of the
fox, now speaks like the fox, as is his right
and duty, the man with the soul of the elephant
now speaks like the elephant, as is his
right and duty, and the woman with the heart
of the nightingale now speaks like the nightingale.

Our evangelist reveals to us his dream that
in the Mystic Year 2018, he is the Vice-President
of the Springfield Athletic Union and his
nickname is Cave Man Thomas. On a certain
day, in the fall of 2018, the president of the
Athletic Union is dying. He is “said to be”
poisoned by a political foe. He hands a key
to Cave Man Thomas. It opens the official
roller-top desk, which is in a building on the
site of the present Y. M. C. A. on Seventh
Street and Capital Avenue. There is a book,
the size and shape and general appearance of
Spaulding’s Athletic Guide, with the same
man with a baseball bat, on the cover. The

39
near pamphlet has no wings or other such
fantastic ornament. It is mundane paper and
ink, with a yellow back.

According to his tale, we two read it alone
of nights. We follow its counsel as one would
secret foot-ball signals. We do not betray the
source of our wisdom to any but Mayor Kopensky
and his friend Dr. Sims. We see large
results of our labors. We two, acting for the
Mayor and the Doctor, smash the face of
everyone who does not submit to our dogmas
about Hell, which we get from the very front
pages of the book. We have more sluggers
on our side every hour. We give God and the
Mayor and the Doctor the glory, and take
none of it ourselves. We hear no music in the
air or such like nonsense, while these things
are going on. The Cave Man insists that the
town is much improved by our policy. Of his
predestined valor I may discourse at an opportune
time. But meanwhile let me show
you a further variation from the typical story
about The Golden Book.

I am more eager to know how the welfare
worker finds herself in the mirrors of 2018
than to receive any other news of that time
from her. Despite all her graces she has no
especial personal vanity. She is more imperious

40
than vain. But I gently insist upon her
confidence till she confesses that she finds herself
in the mirrors of 2018 much the same, but
with a greater rush of blood through all that
magnificent slender frame, and a consequent
higher color. In her dream she rejoices in a
great resiliency, a greater long-bow curve in
action, as she walks with even more of her
humorously commanding way. Her name in
the new time is Gwendolyn Charles.

Gwendolyn Charles is, in 2018, a motion-picture
director and scenario writer. She
claims Rabbi Terence Ezekiel and many other
choice spirits among her stockholders and
backers.

For her enterprise generally runs at a loss,
like Grand Opera, and great orchestras, and
great universities.

I must at this time concern myself with her
story of All Saints’ Day, 2018. Very early in
the morning she finds herself in her leading
theatre which is on the site of the Old Fancy
Bazar on the South side of the Square; by her
side is the aged Rabbi Terence Ezekiel muttering
enthusiastically to himself over strange
and magnificent doings. With him are the
inner company of enthusiasts for her film enterprise.
And the body of the theatre is filled

41
up with its regular patrons, in a most unusual
frame of mind.

There is thrown upon the screen the production
of the studios for that month, the story
of Hunter Kelly, the founder of Springfield,
whose regular solemn festival is July eleventh,
but who is celebrated in a thousand
ways; all year. Unexpected things are happening
in the operator’s box. And it is
a new kind of a projecting machine, utterly
beyond the current devices. But let us consider
the story of Hunter Kelly, as it rolls by
on the screen, the early part of which, to the
year 1920, has been long known to me.

Hunter Kelly was an Irish Catholic boy
reared in a Pittsburgh orphan asylum. In
the very first years of the nation he met, and
became an ardent disciple of, John Chapman—Johnny
Appleseed, and differed from him
seriously on only two points, the Catholic
Church, and hunting. Kelly’s dearest devotion
was re-reading St. Augustine’s “City of
God,” which he carried always in his hunter’s
pouch, by his powder horn. And Johnny Appleseed’s
dearest devotion was in reading and
re-reading Swedenborg’s “Heaven and Hell,”
which he carried in his seed-sack. And Hunter
Kelly would shoot deer, over whom Johnny

42
Appleseed would weep. So these two were
separated when Kelly’s lust for hunting was
on him like the passion of mighty Nimrod.
Then he would live through an almost vegetarian
period, travelling and planting with
John Chapman—Johnny Appleseed, and listening
to his great monologues.

They began together, exploring the primeval
forests near Pittsburgh. Each season they
marched further west, returning in the fall to
the cider mills of Western Pennsylvania, to
beg and sort apple seeds for next spring’s
excursion beyond where any other white men
fought or explored. Kelly and John Chapman
parted at last where is now Fort Wayne in
Northern Indiana. They said “goodbye” in
great love and devotion, Kelly swearing on
St. Augustine’s “City of God” to plant in
honor of Johnny Appleseed, a city like an
apple tree, with its highest boughs in Heaven,
and to begin by sowing there a special breed
of apple seeds the saint gave him with his old
leather seed-sack for a token.

Kelly joined a group of settlers going further
west of the same name, but no kin. He
entered what was then known as the “Sangamaw”
Country with them and lived in their
cabin a while. In this region he planted the

43
world’s first orchards of Apple Amaranth
trees, from the old leather sack.

The first settlers were the Kellys, Matheneys
and Elliots. The young sower of mysteries
lived alternately in their great log
houses, and sat, at the end of his great
wolf-hunts, by their open fireplaces. The
chief of the local wolf-pack was the Devil, and
refused to be slain. At last he took on his true
form and came alone to Kelly when he stood
meditating among the first sprouts of the
famous Apple Amaranth Orchard, and there
gave the young fellow words of admiration
for his valor. For the Devil is often a true
sport.

There Kelly made a compact to submit himself
to torture for many years if the pioneer
city of his vow to Johnny Appleseed might
be built here. He and the Devil swore the
compact on St. Augustine’s “City of God.”

The Devil pledged himself that if the young
hunter’s soul would submit itself to long suffering,
the place could be evolved in time. Old
Satan laughed, and said his little subordinate
devils would then be guided to build better
than they knew. The Devil did not carry Hunter
Kelly to Hell, but devised a special torment.
He buried the mystic a few hundred
feet below the orchard. In the hunter’s living

44
skull and heart were entangled the roots of
the first Apple-Amaranth Trees, and from
them all others of this region come.

The Devil has a great respect for his contracts.
Every year, for a century he dug up
the mystic on Hallowe’en night, and showed
him the city, and every time Kelly said:
“Take me back to my torture. The City is
not yet started.” At last, when the lads returned
from the war with Germany, and the
girls returned from Red Cross work, and the
like, in the summer of 1919, and the city began
to take on glory both visible and invisible,
Hunter Kelly said to the Devil: “I will now
trust my town to go on. At last they are eating
of the Apple Amaranth, which they
thought was poison. They are even transplanting
it.”

Thereupon Hunter Kelly drove the Devil
away with the great pickaxe and spade, the
same which had often dug the hunter from
the ground.

From this pickaxe on, the story was entirely
new to the screen, and much of it new to the
audience.

Kelly then built himself a cell in Heaven
out of old and broken fragments of forgotten
palaces in the far jungles. There he wrote

45
The Golden Book for our little city far below.
By day he lived as that boy of Springfield
who grew up as Saint Scribe of the
Shrines, and established the discipline and
ritual of
The One Hundred Shrines of the
World
. He was rumored among a few of us
to be the reincarnation of Hunter Kelly. He
became the first teacher of St. Friend, who
wore his mantle well after him. And now he
is pictured, in many a dazzling flame-like
color, throwing down from the window of his
cell in heaven, this very hour of All Saint’s
Day, The Golden Book of Springfield.

All this is the first intimation to Gwendolyn
Charles that stranger things than we know
may happen in heaven and on earth. As the
wonder upon the screen moves on, with no
formula of orthodox religion, and indeed with
a sense of humor, like the laughter of the
skies, she understands not what world she is
in, and the lovely hedonist and artist is
shaken with the passions of the mystic St.
Catharine of Sienna.

She is concerned to know that in the box of
the projecting machine is a dazzling presence,
a sort of giant fairy, a little larger than a man,
an operator, indeed, one she has not hired.
There is an orchestra of giant fairies, who

46
play such tunes as blue bells should give forth
in the wild woods.

And meantime, according to her tale, the
book is there, pictured on the screen, circling
around the domes and towers of Rabbi Terence
Ezekiel’s heretical synagogue on east
Mason Street. And so the Rabbi makes haste
to that place, and a few friends follow. But
many people in the audience of quite different
faiths declare that those are their own church
steeples and not his temple towers, and hasten
to the houses of their belief. Which is not so
strange, to one who has been in a law court,
for there it is demonstrated that a witness is
somewhat apt to see and remember what he
desires to see and remember. And so each
finds the book where he has faith to find it.

The Doubter is the next member of our club
to testify and he tells of the midnight visions
he has already described to me.

He is reborn as Mayo Sims, physician of all
the great saints and sinners in the town. Incidentally
he is the political ally of the Rock
and Kopensky families, people obscure in
1920, since they are but tenants on his farms,
but in 2018 in the city government, along with
the tribe of Cave Man Thomas and others.

The physician tells first to me, then to the
rest of the group of forecasters, that he has

47
seen how the book with all its chronicles and
exhortations, rituals and parables, is utterly
rejected by the mass of the citizens of the
Mystic Year. They refuse to let the pages
draw conclusions for them from the past or
move them with hopes for the future. According
to his tale the volume raises a faction of
desperate malcontents, whose business, beside
fomenting strikes, is to sing in a particularly
nasal whine. Some of the rank and file of this
group are shot down, after the city has endured
five days of hideous “racket,” and
more hideous vocal music. There is no magic
ballad or hymn in the air.

There is but one copy of the book, “thanks
be.” It is full of sedition, and therefore tabooed,
but dog-eared from being much passed
around in secret. To be sure it has a cheap
gilt paper cover. It is captured and carried
ten miles east of the city by certain friends of
law and order, members of the Rock and Kopensky
families, led by Cave Man Thomas. It
is dropped into an abandoned coal-shaft. It
goes down like lead. It has no wings. It was
written by hair-brained sociologists, some of
the wild ones from the absurd University of
Springfield, not by “practical business men.”

It is not rescued, from the shaft. The writers

48
of the work go back to their legitimate
teaching, and are heard from never again.

The Doubter goes on to give the genuine
psycho-analytical data on most of the saints
of Springfield at that time. These accounts
are from his confidential records. For he
treats the holy ones for all varieties of nervous
disorder, epilepsy, and the like. He is
quite sure Christ and Mohammed were epileptics,
and that settles it with all such foolishness.
But perhaps you too have doubted.

The Doubter’s variety of revelation during
double consciousness is not all certified by the
man who dreams he becomes Cave Man
Thomas. It is not quite Y. M. C. A. enough.

49

CHAPTER IV

HISTORY OF THE MICHAELS FROM 1920 TO 2018

As news spreads of The Prognosticator’s
Club, and of the remarkable tales and visions
that are unfolded there, new men and women
come to  us, with the word that they, too, have
a dream, persistent and recurring, of the
Springfield of the next century. One such is
Joseph Bartholdi Michael—whose father’s
story belongs here in our narrative.

While many of the blacksmith shops of
Springfield have slowly changed to garages,
there is one in especial that has resisted the
tide in a formidable way. It is the shop located
on the southeast corner of Fifth Street
and Capital Avenue. This place has kept
most of the fancy horse-shoeing trade of the
city in 1920.

The aged proprietor-patriarch, “The Iron
Gentleman,” still does the heavy part of the
work. He has,—with their own help, indeed,
put three sons and three daughters through
college, handsomely. He has trained his sons
to his business and the extraordinary secrets
of his shop, of which the whole tribe are inordinately
proud.

50
In early youth he discovered the process of
hammering out the old Damascus blades, and
vastly improved upon it, and struck off a new
type of sword for the world, and his work has
remained in undeviating pattern and quality
ever since. At his simple forge he hammers
out those wonderful swords in plain sight of
the passer-by or the detective from Europe.
They cannot grasp the secret. He named
his gift to the world, “The Avanel Blade.”
It is waspish and supple, all-conquering in
body and soul. Sideways it can be wound
like watch spring steel, or even a coil of narrow
ribbon. Edgewise it can cut more human
flesh and bone than the heavy guillotine, it
can cut straight through an iron or granite
block of any thickness, as though it were
cutting snow. In its standard form it is
longer than the longest cavalry sword. It is
the assumption of the strange old “Iron Gentleman”
that it will be used mostly by women,
his descendants, and in battle for this land.
Legend has it that the blade is named for a
sweetheart who died in his youth. Certainly
there is no living Avanel. He and his sons
and daughters, all of them trained to his
trade, have shod the horses of the notables of
the country round, of more than one president
of the United States, and of innumerable forgotten

51
candidates for the presidency who began
their careers by ostentatiously going to
his humble shop.

His daughters are quite accomplished in
light, ornamental iron work. They are well
bred, high strung girls, and have the vitality
of young tigers. These girls and their
father are responsible for the most remarkable
phenomenon of the streets of Springfield
in 1917. Inspired by the Amazons of the Russian
Revolution, at the very beginning of that
revolution, before it was declared a failure by
the western world, they filled out an idea
which had long been forming in their minds,
and organized a troop of girl cavalry and
offered it to the government for service
against Germany. The girls were fully disciplined
and equipped at the time of the declaration
of war. Their services were refused,
and almost all of the girls went into the stereotyped
war work, many of them overseas.
But now the whole body of troops is together
again, riding our streets night and day, armed
with the Avanel sword, and led, quite haughtily,
by the Iron Gentleman’s youngest daughter.

The brothers have organized a similar
group of cavalry, armed with the same blade,
and call it The Horse Shoe Brotherhood.

52
But, of course, it has not attracted the same
attention as the dazzling girls. The Horse
Shoe Brotherhood was not accepted by the
government as a body. They enlisted, or were
drafted, one at a time, in a conventional fashion.
Many of the cavalry girls, following the
example of the Michael women, are often
gritty enough to shoe their own horses.

The “Iron Gentleman” is lean and ruddy,
with a hooked and hatchet face. He has the
habit of pointing his long, skinny fingers at
the enemy he denounces, who may be present
in imagination, or even in fact, while the oratory
flows. Every street corner of Springfield
is haunted with the legends of a series of
fist fights in the boyhood biography of “The
Iron Gentleman,” election scrimmages of his
young manhood, and the like. It is said that
at the interesting age of fourteen he broke
half the street lamps of Springfield with well
thrown cinders until one evening when he had
his jacket thoroughly dusted by a most energetic
father. He had several personal encounters
on the streets of Springfield in
middle age, horsewhipping some hereditary
enemy, or thwarting some hereditary enemy
who threatened, imminently, to horsewhip
him.

53
“The Iron Gentleman” is a savage only two
or three days in the year in his old age. He
tells his boys’ and girls’ children and grandchildren,
that they are to shoe horses and
ideas forevermore, and send these ideas galloping
across the world, sure footed; and his
family are to keep on doing this, whether the
town likes it or not. He tells them to hammer
out swords perfectly tempered and to put
their own souls on the anvil and hammer them
till they are swords likewise, and to go forth
and cut their way through the world, and
bring back the heads of their enemies to
Springfield and hang them in rows in front
of their forges, whether the town likes it or
not.

“The Iron Gentleman” and his sons have
revived the cult of boxing and bare fist fighting,
and as a result there is many a black eye
and bloody nose among both “delicate,”
and “muckers” of Springfield. We are as
thoroughly damaged as German duelling students,
though with not quite the same marks.
And the boy scouts are getting battered up,
and something must be done to put a stop
to this.

“The Iron Gentleman” and his two older
sons have the forge-burned faces of blacksmiths.
But though the youngest excels in

54
their accomplishments, he is more a brother
of his father’s cavalry-sword, the Damascus
Blade.

Like the rest he is tall and slender, but there
is a difference. He hardly needs his father’s
gift to the world; he is such a fencer with the
shorter and more conventional blade. He
looks like the flattering portraits of Louis
Fourteenth of France, that were made in that
monarch’s youth. He has a great turn for
pageantry, though with him it has taken a
completely democratic phase. There is no
sounder citizen in all his works and ways
than this Joseph Bartholdi Michael. He has
studied long under Thomas Wood Stevens,
William Chauncey Langdon, and Percy Mackaye.
And so he has established a pageantry
calendar for the city which has been adopted
by the City Commissioners, backed by the
Chamber of Commerce, the Art Association,
the Rotary Club, the Lion’s Club, and the Optimist’s
Club.

He has somewhat mitigated the “scrapping”
of the boy scouts by evolving a code
book of chivalry for them, and it endeavors
to impart taboos, observances, and as well,
honorifics for real merit. He ties up all these
with the pomps of his calendar. He it is that

55
imparts to his youthful followers a special
consideration for the ladies, and reverence for
their beauty.

He fought at the Meuse-Argonne, was all
through the battle of a little more than five
weeks’ length from September 26, 1918, on
through hell and glory to November first,
when the American First Army cut like magic
swords through those four intricate systems
of German defenses, that were spread out
over those famous ten miles. On November
the first he and many Springfield boys, including
his two blacksmith brothers, were going
on like fate, like their own irresistible
blades which they managed to carry into that
long five weeks’ battle. In all this Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the exquisite, was the
dashing leader of his group, a private in the
ranks, but from the beginning to the end,
a
sword
. And they swept forward with the
American First Army till the very end of
hostilities on the eleventh of November. They
did their full share of the work of that American
First Army, which, the experts say, took
sixteen thousand prisoners, 468 guns, 2,664
machines guns, 177 trench mortars, made an
advance of 34 miles in 47 days and set free
1,550 square kilometers of French ground and
150 villages.

56
Indeed they took their due part in that
battle which saved the world.

It is at the end of this battle, at the dawn
before Armistice Day, November 11, 1918,
that Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the exquisite,
has his vision of the year 2018. He dreams
of leaving Springfield for a similar battle
in Asia, with a far more uncertain outcome.
He is about to go forth with The Horse
Shoe Brotherhood and the Amazon Riders,
armed one and all with the Avanel Sword,
against the strange nation of the Singaporians,
who are blasting the world with their
demon ambition as did the Germans of 1914.
And he bears the same name. He is known as
Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Second, is an
old man, with a pageant leader for a son:—Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Third.

Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Second, has
reverted to an exaggeration of “The Iron
Gentleman.” His son, on the other hand,
is in 2018 an exquisite: almost gone to
seed, a histrionic silly. Bartholdi Second
that is to be, touches on the history of the
clan for one hundred years, for the benefit of
the Prognosticator’s Club. On looking deeply
into his dream he finds that his father is still
known among the descendants as “The Iron

57
Gentleman.” About 1925 the children and
grandchildren took for their family flag the
picture of six anvils, and above them six hammers.

In the Mystic Year the cottages of these
people are scattered in every quarter of the
town, and the flag with the six anvils and six
hammers flies in front of almost every cottage
of a descendant, man or woman. The male
descendants, of whatever name or high education,
are blacksmiths and forge workers and
makers of the Avanel blade, as are indeed
many of the women. It seems to take the
Michael hammer stroke to make that blade.
With a few temporary exceptions, the men
are busy horse-shoeing for the Amazons and
making swords.

And with the exception of a few too exquisite
creatures like Joseph Bartholdi, III,
the clan is not inbred. The greater part of the
brains of the tribe is still in their legs and
arms, not off in a separate compartment in
their skulls.

By dint of earnest cross-questioning, I get
it from Joseph Bartholdi Michael, that he has
been a figure in Illinois in dreams of 2000–2018.
He has been the author in precocious
youth of a book, entitled: “Paper Made Nations,”
a treatise on the laws of flying machine

58
commerce, and it became the basis of the
economic side of Black Hawk Boone’s pet
theory and way of life.

According to the model, Joseph Bartholdi,
in his reincarnation, has shod the horses
of many a governor of Illinois and President
of the United States, and President
of the World Government. This husky,
distinguished democracy combines with the
prestige of his precocious book to make him
the most distinguished representative of
the teeming 2018 Middle West, in the
World Government. He champions there the
ceremonies and honors due the International
Flag with the loyalty to what they like
and a sense of the depths of pageantry, that
has distinguished the Michael following from
the beginning. Portia, the Singing Aviator,
has in the generation of the Mystic Year, written
the local song about “The Patchwork Flag
of Michael and the World.” And she calls it
in the same song: “Joseph’s Coat of Many
Colors” or “The Flag of Joseph’s Coat” in
allusion to his fashion of almost draping it
around him, with the Star Spangled Banner,
when he is speaking on high occasions, on
international issues.

Instead of an exquisite, he is lean, wiry,
with a hooked and hatchet face, burned,

59
cooked, in the forge. He finds he has the habit
of pointing his long, skinny fingers at the
enemy he denounces. He finds that, like his
progenitor, “The Iron Gentleman,” he has a
record of putting things through with sheer
fury when there is no other weapon handy.

He tells the Prognosticator’s Club, that,
through the century, the flag with the six
hammers and the six anvils has been smeared
by renegades. But the proud truth-speaking
custom has tortured the whole clan till some
one has risen to confess the sins of the name,
and start new.

And the Michaels have been hated off and
on for a whole century because of these
things, and because they were always hating
some one, even without cause. They were apt
to be jealous of other vigorous citizens, considering
themselves the sole saviors of the
principle of defiant democracy. But all the
century the leading Michaels have seemed to
be saying: “A town well hammered into
shape is better than fortune or fame.” Few
Michaels were guilty of living a private and
secluded existence.

Few maidens were crowned with lovelier
hair or carried themselves with finer mien
than the granddaughters and great granddaughters
of the “Iron Gentleman.” The stock

60
has gone on in beauty and strength through the
vision of a century. Yet in 2018 it seems that
the scepter is just a little departing from the
younger generation. It is not that they are
ousted from public office. The fearless voice
of a Michael always counts most as a private
citizen, and, whenever Joseph Bartholdi Michael,
the Second, returns from The World
Government, he takes his place in the Horse
Shoe Brotherhood as a private in the ranks
beside his son Joseph Bartholdi, the Third,
and it is their full intention, according to
hereditary political habit, to ride against
Singapore, when the time is ripe, as privates
in the ranks.

But a new clan has come up from Cairo,
Illinois, led by Black Hawk Boone. Many of
their young girls look more like young Indian
maids from a government reservation school,
than people of Caucasian stock. But, for all
that, they have their own original ways of
delicate manner and address, most disconcerting
to the fixed limits of Springfield’s conventionality.
They are rather short and heavy-set.
Their merry young men and middle-aged
men have, most of them, long, curly black
lovelocks to the shoulders, not carefully
combed, and nearly all defiantly wag big black

61
beards in every argument, when all other men
in the modern world are shaved clean.

They cheerfully hate the blacksmith clan
which they are ousting by a greater talent for
fury, preaching, and cursing, and by having
just a little more brain at the back of the neck.

The town wits say these clans hate each
other because, on the whole, they are so
much alike, and always vote the same way at
a crisis. The locks of both the Boone men and
women stream back over their shoulders, and
their left hands are dyed crimson as a proud
perpetual reminder to themselves and all the
world that among their ancestors were
aborigines.

But America has not suffered the regime of
nigh two hundred years of baseball umpires:—and
presidential elections accepted by November
15 by the defeated party, without a disposition
to be good sports on the part of self-respecting
clans like these. And so it comes
about to stir the romantic soul of the town
that the Avanel Blade of the “Iron Gentleman”
of 1920 has become a woman in 2018,
but a woman no kin to the Michaels. In 2018
Horse Shoe Brotherhood and Michael Amazons
are under one commander, the lovely
Lady Avanel Boone, and, though they be
armed with the Avanel Blade indeed, she

62
scores a point in family pride and makes them
swear fealty on Daniel Boone’s old hunting
knife, which she carries in her belt as a token
of her Kentucky forbears.

And now, as the son of the “Iron Gentleman”
tells the story, it comes as a clouded
vision before me, as though I were half in the
vision and beginning a destiny of my own.

It is the snowy morning of All Saint’s
Day, 2018, the Michael Clan and a general
assembly of Springfield people are at the
crossing of Fifth Street and Capital Avenue,
and by the ancestral forge on the southeast
corner. The fire is burning high and the bellows
is roaring. The horse of the conquering
Avanel Boone is to be shod by that good sport
Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Second, who
has just returned from the World Government
to take his modest place in the ranks of her
following. And then there are these curly
haired, black browed, black bearded rascals
to whom all Michaels must be polite, and these
Red-Indian looking girls and boys, Avanel’s
innumerable adoring cousins who are publicly
admiring her with hectic words and kissing
her with sugar sweetness and honest family
idolatry. There is a touch of the uncanny, the
restless, the Ishmaelite about all these Boones,

63
they have no business in the streets of a town.
They look like dressed-up wood-choppers, all
but that trim Avanel.

While the snow is blowing into the shop,
white-haired Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the
Second, has taken the old shoes from the
dainty feet of the white pony, and, just as
he is lifting a new shoe from the fire and the
flames leap up, there is a music incredibly
sweet, and with a great whirring of wings
and terrible thunder “The Book” flies out
of the fire, and circles above these two clans.
Avanel with eyes fixed and strained in wonder,
follows it on her unshod horse. The Book
settles into her arms, and I see her sit above
the company like a fairy in a trance, and read
with adoring voice from the snow white book
while the assembled clans and all the citizens
gather close to hear.

The first pages of the volume give in jewelled
and flaming letters a new charter and constitution
for the World Government, based on
the life and teaching of Springfield’s deathless
citizen, Abraham Lincoln.

There is in the air an exquisite song and
around the consecrated Avanel a glory ineffable,
for she is the High Priestess of The Book
for her people. The song in the air praises
her, and urges her, and all those she commands,

64
to valor for the Heavenly Star Spangled
Banner and the Heavenly International
Flag. And the song whispers that the book,
in many strange forms, will appear in many
a green field of our middle west this day, in
many a pulpit and many a lonely mourner’s
house to give life and eternal light.

But, as my neighbor from the blacksmith
shop of 1920 tells the tale more slowly, the
vision turns to mere words again, and then to
dust and ashes. And I myself seem but ashes
on the winds of time.

The histories of the future in the Prognosticator’s
Club are no more contradictory than
the accounts our fathers give of the leading
events of the Civil War.

Everywhere South of Mason and Dixon’s
line they say that Grant surrendered to Lee.
It is in every southern school book. When we
look into history we are made dizzy by cloud
and flame. And we shall still be partizans in
the highest Heaven. There are many earthly
languages. There are many heavenly languages.
There are many blazing, blinding tomorrows.
But they all lead to the same glorious tomorrow
at last.

The Prognosticators are a dithyrambic,
chanting, improvising howling dervish set,
with a certain sense of humor among all these

65
blinding lights, which is but to say they have
elasticity of soul and mind.

Many of the Michael Clan of Springfield, of
1920, returned soldiers, Red Cross nurses, and
other workers, saw kindred visions of the
Flying Book of Springfield blazing above the
trenches at midnight for their comfort, while
voices in the air sang them stories of home.

Reader, in your town many like these are
brooding alone over unaccountable vistas of
the future of their city, that have come to
them in battle or by the fireside or in the
storm. They have found themselves standing
momently at cross streets of vision, before
they felt their hearts to be as dust again. Call
them together. Blow ashes into flame. Start
a brotherhood of your own. Live in the New
City that is revealed to you, as we are living
in our City and in the streets of our Tomorrow.

66

CHAPTER V

I ENTER INTO THE NEW SPRINGFIELD OF 2018. I AM SNUBBED BY AVANEL, SHE RELENTS, SHOWING ME MANY PANORAMAS OF NEW SPRINGFIELD. WE CONFESS TO HAVING THE SAME DREAM OF DEVIL’S GOLD.

But it is not after the noble manner of these
others that I enter at last into the vision of
2018.

There is deep darkness, and time passing
by without end, and shade. There is the fear
of the moles that will not leave me alone, who
make nests of alien dust, beneath my ribs.
And my bones crumble through the century,
like last year’s autumn leaves. Then there is,
alternating with drouth, bitter frost. And
roots wrap my heart and brain. And there is
sleep.

Then a galloping and gay shrieking,
away on the road, to the East of Oak Ridge!
And though I am six feet beneath the ground
the eyes of the soul are given me. I see wonderful
young horsewomen out on that Great
Northwest Road and the ancient clay between
me and that cavalcade turns to air and to

67
light. And I am asking myself as the Girl
Leader goes by like a meteor: “Am I coming
up again through the earth as weed or flame
or man? If I rise from this grave, I am coming
but to praise her, if I may.”

There is deep darkness again, and sleep,
and when next I awake I am in the midst of a
terrible March rain, and I run for refuge into
Dodds’ Drug Store. It is the old Fifth and
Monroe corner. I buy the early afternoon
Register

from a bawling newsboy. It is dated
March first, 2018. Soon the storm abates a
little, but it is a freezing, thawing, wind-whistling,
late afternoon. It is dusk, and I am
walking South on what was once Third Street,
but is now Mulberry Boulevard, with the Chicago
and Alton railroad long gone. And I am
with that girl who awakened me, Avanel
Boone, and there is no poetry about it at all.
It is obvious by the air with which she takes
possession of me and hustles me down that
rain and sleet-scourged avenue, that she considers
herself the heroine of my story. But
dear me, what stubborn material for a heroine.
Here, after a century, woman is the same
she always was.

To put it in restrained phrases she is, in her
disposition, like the weather. She scolds me

68
for the unpressed state of my clothes, and my
mussed hair, and my lack of air of distinction.
She says I have slept in my clothes so much
that they are in a perfectly abused condition.

I admit that I have not consulted a tailor
for some little time. She says I carry myself
as though I were a ditch digger or were following
the plough, instead of walking with a
lady. She lashes me for what she alleges
are my ridiculous ideas, and goes over the
catalogue till it is impossible to enjoy the
panorama that I glimpse through the bracing
sleet and rain, and I scarcely care to look at
her, the little devil,—though she is to be my
heroine.

The only flattering thing about the encounter
is the air of settled proprietorship of
this young lady.

At length there is silence and I chase along
meekly beside her under the umbrella, and
cool down, and do her the honor to look her
over as well as I can in the storm. Her face is
half hidden by her flapping waterproof cape
and we are walking under tremendous shade
trees. I note her chin quite high in the air, her
spirited profile set straight forward, and her
cheeks, with color that goes like a blown-out
flame and then comes again like a heart-beat.

March 2, 2018:—I am again in my New City.

69
I begin the day by reading the Illinois State
Journal of March 2; it is the same paper as
of old. I note the advertisements of laundries,
screen factories, cleaners and dyers, apple
merchants, dealers in hats and caps, dealers
in hay, grain and feed, places for the purchase
of fish, game and oysters, poultry and eggs,
etc. I note ladies’ furnishing establishments,
retail dry goods stores, bakeries, headquarters
for cash registers, meat markets, the establishments
of upholsterers, places where
may be found parcel delivery messengers,
lists of dealers in flour and feed, various advertisements
of baggage and transfer companies,
dealers in wall paper, paints, oils and
varnish, and everything in advertisements in
the Journal to convince me that this is the
same old paper, and the same old capital city.

Yet I am endowed with new powers. I go
about the streets as a sort of a millennial
chameleon. I find myself wearing various
bodies. First I am but myself, kneeling before
the Image of the Virgin, in the church
of St. Peter and St. Paul. In an hour I am a
City Hall stenographer, in the office of the
Mayor. This Mayor is referred to in the Journal
as “Slick Slack Kopensky.” Later in the
morning I am clerk for Justice of the Peace
John Boat, whose office is right by the jail.

70
And both the jail and the office stairs have the
same old skunk smell that has distinguished
jails and the stairs of justice from the beginning.
Later, in the afternoon, I am an emergency
messenger for the Japanese department
of the World’s Fair of the University
of Springfield, and am, to all appearances, a
Japanese. I find myself wearing the clothes
and shoes of these various supernumeraries,
and in my double consciousness, knowing
their affairs all through, as though I had
lived in their frames twenty years. Yet no
matter whose body I seem to wear or whose
tongue I seem to be wagging, I step back into
the same yokel when, once in the morning, and
once in the afternoon, between these episodes
I find myself cowering in the presence of
Comrade Avanel. It is a cloudy, foggy day,
and fog seems to come between us whenever
I try to look at her. In the morning I win
her hard consent to take yesterday’s walk
again, and she promises not to scold me, only
flinging out the assertion that I am a diamond
in the rough and that it is her business to
polish me:—a statement I seem to have heard
before somewhere.

In the afternoon she behaves, and the fog
blows away after a while and I am able to
enjoy the vision of this proud quivering young

71
body and soul. From beneath the bantam-rooster
air emerges a little glimpse of the
sibyl.

For all her tailor-made smartness, she is
like the Indian, and walks unimpeded as
though in moccasins. Her hair is black and
long and straight, and today her fashion plate
profile is changed to something more native
American. Yet her skin is so white and her
cheeks are so red, and the flush comes and
goes so fast, the Indian illusion has completely
disappeared when she turns her face
to me. Her changing elusive face has a haunting
kinship to the countenance of my favorite
and adored image of the virgin that has been
for much more than a century to the north of
the high altar of the church of St. Peter and
St. Paul, where I have been again meditating
this very morning. And I try to tell her that
she is a more earthly younger sister of this
virgin, but indeed of the same tribe and house
of saints.

When she bows her head in what may be
dreaming, there is to my foolish imagination
a hint of Pallas Athena about the action.
When she lifts her head, and looks me full in
the face all the upper part of her countenance
is definitely a feminized portrait of Shelley,
and she wears those curls hiding either ear

72
after the smartest fashion of 2018. They are
called the Harriet Beecher Stowe curls, and
copied from those in the most frequent portrait
of Harriet Beecher Stowe, when she was
a dazzling young woman. I try to tell Avanel
how her beauty seems, but my speeches are
not eloquent and my heroine is neither poetess
nor prophetess in her replies. She says “I
cannot be all of those creatures. Your figures
contradict.”

I answer: “Step into my hall of mirrors,
and you will discover yourself to be all I have
said, and a devil in the bargain.”

She drifts to speaking of her father, born
in southern Illinois, descendant on one side
from Daniel Boone, and on another from a
Kentucky Indian chief of long ago. For the
first time that high throaty snobbish mannerism
and affected even tone disappear from
her voice, and she speaks as a human creature
should. She cannot be a society chatterbox
when discussing her clan.

She goes on to tell how her mother came of
two long lines of Springfield Catholics. And
I gather, as Avanel talks on and on, and I
piece it out from dim memories that float
about the back of my head, that two lines of
her mother’s house were the one Irish, and
the other Lithuanian, and that long ago this

73
woman was the most famous dancer of The
Gordon Craig Theatre. She died in Avanel’s
fifteenth year. And it seemed in the local
fitness of things for the little girl with the
same talent to go forward bearing the same
responsibilities as soon as she could carry
them, dancers coming to their own early, if
they ever have a place. She was soon the head
of all those who could make Springfield’s devotional
ideals clear and appealing, through
those inherited rituals. Avanel and her group
have danced for the Churches at Christmas
and other times, and, in the history of her art
most important of all, the festivals of Johnny
Appleseed, and of St. Scribe and Hunter
Kelly. And now I begin to remember with
her some of those occasions as through rifts
of cloud.

Now Avanel says she does not want me to be
seen in the audience where she gives a religious
dance. She is angry with herself and me,
because she is herself flattening out so, after
talking on religious matters. But I am philosophical
about this young woman, today, and
look about at what we are passing.

We stare silently into the windows at adding
machines, mantels, grates, and tiles. We
pass a wholesale house for barber supplies,

74
and Avanel says I need a hair cut. We pass
the business houses of feather-renovators and
dealers, of dealers in safes and locks, and
rubber stamps. I note aloud in passing that
Avanel has many rubber stamp ideas and
needs to alter them if she would do justice to
her glorious face. She answers not. We walk
on. We pass through a wholesale region, and
while the fog still conceals the towers of the
town and comes lower, we can look into the
windows yet, and I note that this is not as in
the century before. Almost every wholesaler
has a dazzling insignia and coat of arms. This
is true for instance of the manufacturing machinists
and millwrights, the headquarters for
tempering and dies. It is true, even, of the
dealers in sand and gravel, the tinners and
slate roofers, the transfer and trucking companies,
the brick and tile manufacturers, the
soda water manufacturers, the pump manufacturers,
the cigar manufacturers, the leather
and belting men, and many others that to me
were most commonplace of old. But their
window displays are as the throne rooms of
knighthood.

March 3:—Mist and darkness of soul are
clearing away. And I am welcomed in my
real and permanent aspect in the streets

75
of the New Springfield, by many fellow citizens
that it appears I have known for long.
I am to them also the yokel Avanel thinks
me to be, and I meet with many covert smiles.
It seems I have returned after years of
art study in New York, and it is the first
time many of them have seen me for quite
awhile. I am welcomed back to town a
slightly boresome but harmless cousin. But
everyone calls his worst enemy cousin, as in
a Kentucky village. Young Jim Kopensky
asks in a cousinly manner why I start art
classes here, if I had any kind of prospects in
New York, rather implying that I am here
because I have nowhere else to go. He takes
up a strain remarkably like that of Avanel,
and insists that I failed with the great metropolitan
oracles of art because of uncreased
trousers, and merely stares with incredulity
when I insist that their trousers are often uncreased,
and some of them dress like rag
bags. Despite many similar greetings, I inwardly
vow to start my art classes anyhow,
and I spend a morning having a most fraternal
chat with Sparrow Short. He is retouching
a portrait of Mara of Singapore,
painted several years ago when she was a
young girl, and the political issue between

76
Singapore and America was not so keen.
Short is determined to exhibit it at the August
opening of The World’s Fair of the University
of Springfield. In this picture I behold
her in her glory, a premature creature of thirteen,
a Singaporian Juliet, Short says “more
hectic in her aspect than she is now. At the
present she is an exceedingly cool panther.”
The days Short painted this portrait, she was
deeply reading the most inflaming Singaporian
romance, and in the portrait it flashes
recklessly from her, and her eyes and mouth
are round with the thought of the loves of
the lost gods, who flourished before the prophet
of the Cocaine Buddha of Singapore
killed them all in the jungle. She is dressed
in green silk and in her hands is a great green
feather fan. Short is painting out certain
vague white blossoms on a bush in the background
and turning them to green buds, for
Mara has imperiously demanded it.

I am living near the studio of Sparrow
Short, in one of the old houses of Springfield
on South Fourth Street which existed in my
previous life, and where once lived a dear
friend of mine.

Everything in the old house is disposed and
ordered as formerly, and it is only when I
step out on the front lawn and pass under

77
a certain mulberry tree that I seem to be in
the New Springfield.

I pass under this tree. I walk a little way
to the house of Avanel, and we saunter
abroad. And the fogs are blowing away and
she is in a most amiable mood, and I am able
to note that our city is indeed a flying, fluttering
place.

Confectioneries, auto trucks, popcorn vans,
pleasure machines, and the passing crowds
are decked with ribbons and streamers.
Many families have a flag pole in the front
yard with a row of tiny ancestral flags, one
over the other, each indicating some form of
skilled or unskilled manual labor by which
the ancestors of the house made their way,
and it is considered a disgrace to display any
other type of ancestral flag, but one which
shows some form of manual labor.

But many staffs have only three flags, that
of the town, that of the International Government,
and above these, the Star Spangled
Banner. These people pride themselves in
being more democratic, and not parading
their ancestry. Nearly all business houses,
particularly the large and wholesale houses,
have their own especial banners and bunting,
and some give out toy balloons and the like to
the children, marked with the same schemes.

78
The Star Spangled Banner is above everything,
even on the International buildings, to
indicate that the United States has the old
South Carolina privilege of secession from
the World Federation, whenever she pleases.

And so I am walking with Avanel, on the
late afternoon of March third, 2018. We find
ourselves very near the center of the group
of slender Sunset Towers. Seven of them are
of the seven colors of the rainbow, one for
each color, placed in a circle around the Truth
Tower, which is in the very center of the
star-plan system of boulevards. We climb
the Truth Tower and look about. The Truth
Tower is also called The Edgar Lee Masters
Tower, and it is high above the rest. At the
foot of it is the circular green with Golden
Rain-Trees from New Harmony, Indiana. This
is called the Edgar Lee Masters Park. Near
by is the Lincoln Memorial Park, containing
the marked sites of Lincoln’s three law offices,
and in the center our first State House, now
the Lincoln museum. On the sides of all the
Sunset Towers that one may see from the
old public square is spread the Red Star
of Springfield, set in the White Star of Illinois.
Searchlights blaze through it, spreading
red and white light. Outside the white Truth
Tower that soars above all the city, and

79
outside its rainbow circle of campaniles, the
ninety-two other campaniles shimmer in the
sun, their hues ranging from grey to rose-grey,
and grey-gold to rose-gold. And they
grow wilder in the red, black and white
gorgeousness of the night.

The fifty towers on the outermost circle are
the newest. They are the only separate buildings
of the World’s Fair of the University of
Springfield, except one long street called
“The Street of Past History,” which is about
a mile to the south beginning at Bunn Park
and sweeping toward the northwest in a
quarter of a circle to the high hill of Washington
Park. Every building in the city is
officially a part of the fair and in theory at
least, the City is the Fair.

It is late in the evening, and I am with
Avanel on top of the Truth Tower, and she is
relenting, not so much toward me, as toward
her town. It is the first time she has taken
in the panorama, since the last circle of towers
was completed and The Street of Past History
illuminated.

“I must admit,” she says, “the civic patriotism
of two most unfashionable persons. Old
Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Second, who is
away now at the legislature of the World Government,

80
is the head of our whole architectural
project. He is something of a Smart Set
person, and is in fact an old West Pointer. But
the real work was done by the most unpopular
Thibetan Boy and the architectural planning
and imagining was by the negro John Emis.
Old Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Second,
has lent his name to protect these people,
and leave them unmolested in their project.
As it is, he turns his appropriation over to
them. The city would not give either of such
a salary. It will give the Thibetan Boy a little
credit, when all is over, but John Emis none
at all, because he is a negro. When you go
down into the streets again you will find a
black stripe tucked away in some odd corner
of the design of every building in The Street
of Past History. If you look you will see
that same stripe now, on the outer circle
of towers. It goes slenderly around the fourth
story and the tenth. That black stripe is the
personal secret signature of John Emis, the
negro architect.”

The voice of this woman beside me alters
to that gentle and human tone in which she
spoke of her mother, as though this city, too,
has its hand somewhat on her heart. Yet she
is proud and almost barks at me when I attempt

81
any kind of understanding, and to her
I am not of this city, and my sole excuse for
living is that I admire her, and therefore must
be forgiven every other trait in my character
till she has time to mend my ways. My scalp
must dangle at her belt.

“I begin to be almost reconciled to living
in Springfield,” she muses, “Springfield is all
society, you know, and it is hopeless to try
to make it anything else. Of course there are
some places where it pays to have ideas, but
here a girl must conceal ideas if she has
them.”

Then, in an instant, another Avanel seems
to flash forth. “You think I am a snob and
a fool, you silly art student, but I would die
for the International Flag far sooner than
people like your idol Sparrow Short.”

Avanel points out to me old Camp Lincoln,
northwest, beyond the towers. There she
leads the Amazonian Cavalry and the Horseshoe
Brotherhood in bi-weekly drill, in preparation
for the possible war against Singapore.
Looming like the dome of the Taj Mahal
above the trees is a gigantic world globe,
which marks the center of the field. Around
this shining map of everything her drills
are held.

82
But I answer her cut: “Sparrow Short is
no idol of mine, and you know it. I regard
him as the best teacher of art in Springfield,
but I do not accept his international views.”

“It seems to me,” she gives reply, “that
you are always finding excuses for dubious
revolutionaries, whose spirits and bodies are
rag bags.”

About nine in the evening, there are star-chimes
from all the towers. The bells are
singing the song of Portia, the aviator:—“Look
up at the far-off suns, Oh hearts of
eternal desire.”

Avanel speaks to me in a swearing tone of
voice: “I think I cut fewer people than you
do. I should not be elected the head of the
Amazons if I were a fool about exclusiveness.
As a matter of fact I cut those who go
to the parties of Mara, the daughter of the
Man from Singapore. It is plain she gets
those people under her roof to poison them
against the world government or at least
muffle their suspicions of her father’s doings
and the doings of his like. You are the only
person who thinks I cut loyal patriotic
people.”

I am wondering why I like this Avanel. I
conclude it is because of her overwhelming

83
vanity and unbreakable pride. She has the
soul of a thousand peacocks and there is a
potential lioness in her beside.

She clasps her hands and looks silently over
the city, her eyes wide and leaping with delight
over the glory of the illumination. I say
to Avanel: “My Fathers have been long in
the grave, and my own dust has long been
buried in other dust. I walk with you, only
because my heart loved you, one hundred
years ago.” But she does not understand me
in the least, when I talk in this fashion.

March 4:—It is such an established custom
among the young people of 2018 to watch the
sunset from the great uninterrupted glass
spaces of the upper halls of these sunset
towers that there may be found the most
famous cafeterias of the town. We dine at
the top of one of them. There with gay singing
the young democracy, and the young cocks
of the walk as well, linger and wait till long
past the afterglow. This evening the haughty
Avanel consents to take dinner with me, that
she may reprove me once more, seeing that, in
general, my name is mud, however I may try
to improve.

The catalogue of her hoity-toity friends
rolls on forever and I can only protest by saying

84
that while these are undeniably good citizens,
they are all sisters, cousins, aunts and
uncles of those who are invited to Mara’s
parties, and thus quite near to treason.

But now the town choir sings the civic
hymn from a tower near by:—“Springfield
Awake, Springfield Aflame” and all the young
people about join in the chorus, and as Avanel
sings devoutly she cannot help but be the
other self whose existence she tries to deny.

March 7:—I am dining again in the tower
cafeteria with Avanel, a quite early dinner,
and while the afterglow still blazes we look
down upon the clustered cottages of our town.
They are, in design, dominated by the so-called
“Violet Curve,” a complex rhythm,
which is magnified from the whorls of the
violet petals, and the cottages are generally
violet in hue. Some of the roofs and cupolas
are beginning to be gilded. Springfield extends
over the whole county through the taking
in of countless groves, orchards, and
aviation fields.

Not only in their special groves, but everywhere
titan Amaranth Apple vines rise on
trellises high above the other trees, for this
famous Amaranth is a kind of a tree-vine
that is in the fall thick with red and

85
white blossoms and clusters of red apples.
There are many parks in the New Springfield
that were not in the old Springfield: Rankin,
Sandburg, Humphrey, Roberts, Joyce Kilmer,
Masters, Untermeyer, and others. Avanel
points out the public schools beneath us, often
rebuilt on the old sites or near them, and bearing
the same names. Ancient streets keep
their names, except where boulevards have
replaced them.

East of Tenth Street is the Negro district,
all new, beautiful, flamboyant jungle houses,
constructed for his people by John Emis, and
through his influence not one slack old building
remains, though, “most of them still hold
slack colored people,” Avanel says. These
houses are far richer than the towers and
other buildings of the World’s Fair, for only
here in Africa has John Emis an unrestrained
hand.

March 8:—Avanel, with a view to my
further chastisement, takes me about, scolding
again, and we encounter a row of grotesques
on great pedestals, which she confesses
were put up by a group of young Boones
who came from near Cairo, led by her father
in his more fiery youth, when the Boones had
by no means so strong a hold on the city.

86
They are in Liberty Park, near Concordia
College, whose golden pinnacles glitter
through the bare limbs of the trees. On
the central pedestal of the grotesques is inscribed:
“To the cornerstones of the town;
to the newspaper and motion picture and
stage censors; to the respectables, the lady
bountifuls, the so-called senior families; to the
Sons and Daughters of the American Revolution;
to the Sons and Daughters of the Ancient
Democrats, and the Sons and Daughters
of the Ancient Republicans; and in general,
to the dragon-quack worm of respectability,
that dieth not.” Avanel says these were put
up the day the “
Boone Ax
” newspaper was
founded.

On the central pedestal, which is higher and
more massive than the rest, crawling down
from the top, is a dragon with a duck’s head.
On the top of the other pedestals are the stone
images of a fretful ape, an enormous frog, a
long nosed ant eater, a laughing idiot, a hawk,
a goat, a three-legged bull dog wearing a plug
hat, a chicken without feathers, and a hog
wearing trousers.

I say, on looking at these: “Avanel, I desire
to meet your father, the honorable Black
Hawk Boone. I darkly suspect he is one of

87
those who go about in unpressed clothes
and will doubtless furnish me with words to
say to you. I should say that the daughter
of such a father should be willing to dye her
left hand crimson, for him, proudly.”

Avanel answers with a tearful solemnity,
positively babyish:—“If you truly love me
you will not use my father against me. While
I respect him, I cannot respect all his clan and
ideas and I am even more vexed over his way
of mixing with mussy people. If I must have
that kind of thing, I go to the saint who does
it for religion and not from philosophy. I
want you to meet St. Friend.”

March 10:—Late this evening I buy a sack
of popcorn and walk about the shopping district
alone, eating the well-buttered corn from
my pocket, and swinging my cane, and observing
the beauty of the ladies as they go
into the theatre with their escorts. Many of
them remind me of girls I used to eye with
breathless reverence in Springfield. I am glad
to wonder over beauty without being vexed
with it, and I stand in the shadow, inwardly
defying Miss Avanel. And having defied her
about an hour, I call at nine o’clock, feeling
perfectly emancipated, and tell her the following
story:—

88
“Avanel, last night we went abroad into
Dreamland together, hand in hand and heart
in heart, looking with equal guilt for the
Golden Pool of the Handsome Medicine Man,
Devil’s Gold. It was way past midnight when
we found him, in the midst of the black
prairies of Dreamland I well know. He
was making his medicine, and dishonoring
our souls, by calling our names across the
plain. We did not flinch. We walked straight
to his yellow campfire, and looked into his
gilded face and admired his yellow blanket,
and right by his fire we satisfied our wicked
desire by admiring ourselves in his golden
pool.

“Our faces were close together, and as we
looked into the pool, we saw ourselves in a
mundane world, so perfect that its materialism
became magical.

“We walked down through the pool, as
though into an underground house, and we
looked into each others faces again. And we
were moving, gilded images from head to feet,
and we were satisfied with each other at last,
and I knew I wanted you to be gilded as
much as you desired me to be so, and we took
the wickedest pleasure in looking upon the
yellow world around us.”

“Yes,” said Avanel, “I walked there with

89
you in my dream last night, and I hope we
will walk in houses of holiness together and
I am sorry we walked in the pool of gold.
Come with me to St. Friend.” After that,
Avanel is more of a Christian.

90

CHAPTER VI

THE TWO FACTIONS:—MAYOR SLICK SLACK KOPENSKY AND HIS BOSS, MAYO SIMS;
VERSUS
BOONE, PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION.

April 3, 2018:—It is a sunny April morning.
I note some tiny spring beauties in the patches
of snow. Every cloud threatens, but every
cloud rolls by. I begin to apprehend April’s
pretty promise of final deliverance from frost
and snow. I am loafing around the coffee
houses, listening to the talk, and being received
as one of the more obscure inhabitants.
Occasionally some one asks, with an effort at
interest, if I am starting my art classes soon.
But the most lofty and the most humble call
me “cousin,” as they do one another. I am
sounded a bit as to whether I share the political
opinions of Sparrow Short, and incidentally
if we belong to the same school of
art teaching, and if he will give my classes a
criticism from time to time. I write down the
name of the youth who seeks me out desiring
to enroll and am for the first time flattered.

By putting fugitive bits of loud talk with

91
observations of the last few mornings, I begin
to get the social fabric, and take a lesson in
New Springfield’s politics.

More women vote than men. Woman is
the housekeeper and municipal politics is a
kind of nest building and a house keeping of
a sort.

The women follow their old occupations.
And they have many new ones. They are locksmiths,
safe experts, confectioners, cigar factory
workers and owners, makers of advertising
novelties for the whole world, eye, ear,
nose and throat physicians, bill posters, wallpaper
cleaners, opticians, dog, cat, and bird
doctors, barbers, undertakers, auctioneers,
dentists, and a thousand other things. But
this does not mean that women monopolize
such occupations. It is only a minority that
leaves the home. But it is a majority that
floods the elections. They are about equally
divided between the established factions
among the men and perhaps getting the mass
of their opinions from the men but certainly
furnishing their own steam.

I note many curious phases of caste, if
there may be said to be such in a fluent community
where everyone may change his status
before nightfall by doughty deed or awful

92
failure. There is an exalted status to occupations
that were once deemed commonplace.
There is yet the same distinction that used to
go to lawyer or doctor or head of a university
department, but it is extended to such
seemingly miscellaneous occupations as conductors
of Turkish baths, special gymnasiums
and mud baths, billiard halls, bowling alleys.
Stores for sporting and athletic goods convey
great distinction. And the demi-god of
these, Cave Man Thomas, is indeed held in
high regard and his minions have almost the
same lustre, and so he is one of the eleven
city commissioners.

But the end of these surprises is not complete.
There is a particular dignity given to
junk dealers, cobblers, garbage handlers, and
manufacturers, and devisers of patent medicines.
They stand as did the lords, dukes,
knights, and bishops of old, if there is a charm
to their private characters equal to that of
their public service.

I find that a special training, and therefore
a special distinction, is involved in being
shoddy manufacturers, pawnbrokers, silo
manufacturers. And many other once simple
ways of making a living have become so complex
and fastidious that they are the signs of

93
nobility. But respectability, in man or
woman, is, as a matter of fact, not always a
thing of occupation in the final analysis. It
may be a matter of race or of personal record.
And sometimes it seems to be a matter of
party politics.

The really significant party lines are local.
The Democratic and Republican parties have
their turn every four years at national elections
but at all other seasons new ideas come
into the local commissioners, platforms that
cannot be classed as Democratic or Republican
ideas and the people do not array themselves
under those banners but rather the banners
of Doctor Mayo Sims on the one hand
and Black Hawk Boone on the other.

New Harmony, Indiana, is particularly distinguished
for sending in civic and social recruits
to Boone’s faction, though the nucleus
of the faction came up with him from
Cairo. While New Harmony was founded by
those who protested against mystical religion,
many of the present waves of enthusiasm
from that exceedingly vital place were born
in the New Harmony Methodist and Episcopal
churches. They take to Boone by affinity,
and hate Mayo Sims by instinct.

With no particular support from Boone,
they have cultivated the mania for planting

94
the highly specialized ever-blooming Golden
Rain Trees from New Harmony as symbols
of democratic feeling and as a way of saying
that all men are created equal. And they call
them The Gate Trees, since, passing under
them, we enter the gate to the free land of
democracy in symbol if not in fact. The horticulturists
from New Harmony are making
newer and more magnificent varieties of the
tree and sending them across the world.

But in the Mystic Year, Springfield is
rather to be discussed, for instance—as a convention
center, which has at last evolved into
the home of a perpetual World’s Fair. It is
as of old, a travelling man’s home city, a
retired farmer’s place of sleep, a state official’s
paradise. Agricultural experts, coal
mining experts, would-be statesmen of the
middle west, have the same general relation
to the city about them that they had in the
ancient days of the horse-cars, and the Sangamon
County Fair. The town has many of its
ancient types. But they are overshadowed by
the sculptors, the motion picture scenario
writers, the motion picture directors and
actors, and the prophets and sibyls of all
the arts that go to make up a University
Fair. The entrance examination for permanent
residence in Springfield, except for the

95
native-born, is the same as that for the Universities
of America. The native-born, no
matter how stupid or cranky, cannot be banished.
There are so many extreme followers
of the various local religious and philosophical
sects that Springfield is as much a Hobby
Horse Fair as University Fair, if we are to
believe the wits and the laughing poets.

One index of the hobby riding character of
the place is the way the humorous columnist,
Romanoff, in the
Boone Ax
characterizes conspicuous
people, even at the risk of suit. Today’s

Boone Ax
contains a new epithet: “The
Muttering Thibetan,” a name for the young
architect and protege of St. Friend, the
Bread Giver. This youth makes his acquaintances
impatient by talking to the empty air
as he walks the streets.

The columnist names himself: “The Sentimental
Romanoff.” He it is who named John
Short, political rebel and painting teacher:
“Sparrow Short.” He perpetually hounds the
mayor with the nicknames: “Slick Slack
Kopensky” and “Sims’ Bitters.” This last is
because Mayo Sims is deemed the boss and
Kopensky his dose to be administered to the
town in regular spoonsful.

The deathless industrial revolution that
followed the war with Germany still rumbles

96
along elsewhere, with strikes, boycotting,
blacklistings, picketings, street barricades,
dynamitings, massacres, and general annoyances
and bedevilment:—advancing, retreating,
and advancing again, through three generations
and around the world.

But, for the most part, the soreheads outside
of Springfield, particularly those stewing
in their own caldrons in Chicago, serve vicariously
to set us free. We are wrestling
with more up-to-date nuisances, with a
brighter goal in sight.

It is the dream of a human beehive far from
the Marxian society. It is something on the
newest New Harmony model, a Springfield
that is democratic, artistic, religious, and
patriarchal, and therefore following many of
the most ancient forms and metaphors of
orthodoxy, as an electric light may be softened
and given its final character by the shell
of an ancient horn lantern.

April 7:—This evening I take Avanel
Boone to the Henry George dinner. When I
see that long array of distinguished citizens
and Avanel names off to me their offices and
attributes, I realize that Henry George triumphs
in an especial manner over the soul of
Springfield, and I rejoice in this with all my

97
heart, for I deeply revere the man and glory
in his influence. Avanel first points out to me
the followers of her saints:—St. Scribe of the
Shrines, who has only recently departed this
world, and St. Friend, The Bread Giver, who
is still to be seen in the Springfield Cathedral,
active and wonderful. And here are some of
the principal followers of this dynasty of
saints:—the pious Darsies, the wholesome
Hollys, the sad Rancies, torch bearers of liberalism.
Among them are endless officers and
privates in the ranks of the Amazonian and
the Horseshoe Brotherhood, all religious and
political radicals. Avanel is much amused to
point out at the dinner an equal number of
opposites, though often of the same nominal
allegiances, the snobbish Rues, the wirehaired
Radleys, the iron-ribbed Standings,
and some of the less powerful of the mayor’s
faction, some young Kopenskys, Rocks, and
the like, who have no more to do with the
spirit of Henry George than they have to do
with the New Testament.

My dear Avanel grows more sarcastic and
almost breaks up the meeting at our end of
the table when Jefferson Radley, henchman
and slave of the wicked Doctor Mayo Sims,
opens the evening with a speech in which he
names Henry George and Alexander Hamilton,

98
in the same tone of voice and with the
same praise.

And now I get my first sight of Black Hawk
Boone. As he rises to speak, my dear Avanel
blushes with ill-repressed pride and she cannot
keep the sparkle from her eyes and the
tension of embarrassment and love from her
face as Black Hawk shakes his mane.

He is a short man, with a curly big black
beard such as Ashurbanipal and Nimrod must
have shaken at their foes. His cheek is flushed
with anger and his midnight eyes give out
lightning and he hits the table till the dishes
rattle and as good as denounces Jefferson
Radley as a hypocrite and a scoundrel. He
is plainly one of those accustomed to having
his way completely, as far as he has it at all,
for few people will have the energy to combat
the wrath he puts into any battle or into such
a thing as a pretty after-dinner tribute to
a saint. Boone howls, and snaps his teeth together.
His terrible sneer would destroy all
but a rhinoceros or a seasoned politician.

At length Boone possesses himself enough
to speak clearly and with much economic eloquence,
a perfect bore to Avanel and myself.
She is trying to fascinate me by allowing me
to hold two of her fingers under the table.
Then suddenly the banquet ends and she

99
goes home with her father, looking severely
at me. And she kisses her father, and whispers
in his ear—no doubt that he made an excellent
speech. Boone does not so much as
glance my way and I must wait till another
time to talk to him. He has never been at
home when I have called on his daughter.

April 10:—The city hall is apparently less
rigid than of old, a masterpiece of the happy-go-lucky.
Mayor Slick Slack Kopensky,
“Sims’ Bitters,” is sitting next to me at a
coffee house table with Sims and Kusuko
and Cave Man Thomas, all parts of the City
Hall machine. Kopensky looks like the pictures
of President William McKinley. While
by no means so large a character, he is, by
all reports, much more picturesque in his political
methods. He is even now saying to his
coterie and with intent that those near by may
hear if they so desire: “All the governments
above that of the city weigh on the people
like a hat of lead. But the government of our
City Hall, as long as I have my way, is going
to be as gay and easy as safety will allow.
As long as the Public School bunch act like a
bunch of regulators and hoot-owls, we will
beat them to pulp.”

April 12:—Now I note certain established

100
and accredited loafers, who are assumed to be
part of the landscape. I find that the gang of
Kopensky, Sims, and so forth have not failed
to annex every one of such, who can tell a
smutty story to some jolly group of pornographically
inclined gentlemen. Mayo Sims
believes in the medicine of laughter to cure
the sickness of a political machine, and with
Kopensky’s help has made it appear on the
surface that the issue is between the laughing
City Hall and the militant and irksome University.
So I get a public-school map of the
city from the Board of Education offices and
hire a taxi and make a quick still hunt around
all the old and new sites. Judging by the
equipment alone, I conclude at once that the
public schools of Springfield have gone on
like a line of irresistible battle-tanks. There
is a complete material ladder from the first
grade, on through the awards and honors of
The University World’s Fair that sets itself
in rigid competition with the masters of the
world. But there are, no doubt, many qualifications
to this outline to be offered by friends
and enemies of the system. It is plain in one
taxi ride that the system has commanded
rivers of ungrudged money and I can well believe
that outside the political field the system

101
has had an unbroken and unchallenged prestige.

In the coffee houses and the gigantic
loafing lobbies of the motion-picture theatres
and over the endless ice cream tables of
the drug stores and confectioneries and in the
lounging rooms of the dance-halls everywhere
the argument roars and rattles and clatters
and squeals and shrieks and splutters and
swears. Every kind of a skirmish between
Catholic and Protestant, aristocrat and democrat,
labor and capital, is obliterated or
merged into this main war. Springfield is
Black Hawk Boone, President of the Board
of Education and the World’s Fair of the
University of Springfield and editor of the
relentless
Boone Ax
:—
versus
this gang
composed of Mayor Kopensky, Sims, his boss,
and the laughing, dancing crew led by Drug
Store Smith and Coffee Kusuko and Cave
Man Thomas.

Practically all the religious leaders and all
the people with names of real distinction and
untainted standing are with Black Hawk
Boone. His School Board includes among
others Rabbi Terence Ezekiel, Roxana Grey,
Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Third, son of
the Senator who represents us in the World
Government, St. Friend, the Bread Giver,

102
Rachel Madison, the Christian Science
Reader, Mary Timmons and John Emis, representatives
of the African Race, Gwendolyn
Charles, the Motion Picture Director and
scenario writer, Patricia Anthony, Josephine
Windom of the Three Color Printing Department.
They are a dithyrambic, chanting improvising
howling-dervish set, with a local
millennial dialect of their own and lacking
mainly in that sense of humor and everydayness
and that cold political self-control with
which the City Hall is fully supplied.

103

CHAPTER VII

FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE POLITICAL MACHINERY, INCLUDING THE CITY HALL DRAG NET OF DRUG STORES, COFFEE HOUSES AND DANCE HALLS.

April 11, 2018:—Mayor Kopensky is particularly
deep in Singapore learning. He conceals
his well-beloved studies in public, as
senators of old used to conceal their wealth.
He must, of course, get his majorities from
the University students, who are the majority
of the population, so many are studying even
after marriage, and so many men continue
their studies after entering business.

In political hours the attitude even of the
older students of the University of Springfield
is seemingly ungrateful. It is that of the
traditionally impudent college freshman
toward the imaginary greasy grind and
toward the professor who eggs him on to
scholarship. They think the names of these
City Commissioners: “Cave Man Thomas,”
“Sparrow Short,” “Coffee Kusuko,” “Montague
Rock,” “Drug Store Smith,” “Jefferson
Radley,” “Mayo Sims,” mean dash and
romance.

104
This is the “City Hall” block of seven
people in the city commission of eleven. The
Mayor is the eighth. He seldom has occasion
to use his prerogative of the casting vote, for
it is not often five to five on a side. There
are only three people in the commission who
represent the School Board, one of them is
Black Hawk Boone.

Boone roars away with the others, who
are on his right and left, like Aaron and Hur
holding up the hands of Moses. And it is only
at the end of some long and well dramatized
skirmish that Boone wins by forcing the issues
in his paper the
Boone Ax
and scaring a
more cowardly four in Kopensky’s faction to
vote with him temporarily on what seems a
purely educational issue. It is not always the
same four he bulldozes and many and obvious
are his plots.

Drug Store Smith and Coffee Kusuko supply
about one-fifth of cold science to the
Mayor’s City Hall stew. They represent the
“slick” side of Kopensky. They have natty
ideas of dress and natty ideas of administration.
The remainder of Kopensky’s routine
political workers are slack in every way except
in the matter of secret party-discipline.

The columnist Romanoff in a charitable
mood says, in the
Boone Ax
for April 11,

105
2018:—“When we view the soggy-souled but
amiable group of city fathers around Kopensky,
we rejoice. There is no sign of a complete
clean-up of the ages. The patriot is still
at home in the government. And, as Andrew
Jackson knew, there is an intrinsic governing
power in any mass of humanity linked by
friendship and under American skies. Along
with the City Hall dishonesty there goes a
certain mercy and fraternity, far from the
sternness of the editor of this paper, who may
take my remarks for what they are worth, and
he may fire me if he chooses. Let my boss, the
editor, admit, since he must, that the City
Hall gang keep our more angular truth-telling
moods from torturing the town beyond
reason. As it is, I declare myself the only
real jester among all our children of light.”

April 15:—As I wander about, I am glad
that in my former life I was a member of
the Anti-Saloon League of Central Illinois.
There is no such thing as a saloon to be seen.
The bar room is as extinct as the trilobite.
Coca-Cola and Bevo have their new successors
every day, along with mysterious elaborations
of coffee and tea, and spiced drinks from the
Jungles of South America. And, of course,
after a hundred non-alcoholic years the soda
fountains have tremendous importance. Drug

106
Store Smith, member of the city council, is the
local Soda Fountain King. He is now the
owner of all the drug stores, including Dodds’
Drug Store, which keeps its old location at
Fifth and Monroe.

I have indeed a curious impression as I go
into Dodds’ for a soda. Fifth and Monroe reminds
me of a century before. It is still the
street-car center of our town. There are as of
old long benches in Dodds’ where people are
waiting to take street cars and there are the
same revolving stools along the soda fountain
counter but that counter is twice as long and
there are tables for customers now. The sodas
are as good as those wonders Jim Sylva used
to mix, but no better.

Across the street is the old Coe’s Book
Store, owned by some descendant of the original
Coe family. There is, as of old, a great
counter of magazines, some of them better,
some of them rawer than the old list. Many
of them are now published in Springfield or
near by. The majority of the motion picture
magazines are full of simpering photographs
of Los Angeles ladies in bathing suits. They
are, of course, delightful to behold but the
mystery still remains as to what this has to
do with the art of the motion picture. Of the
literary magazines, the
Atlantic Monthly
and

107
Poetry
, a
Magazine of Verse
, still survive.
The
Atlantic
still keeps its brick red cover
and its nippy New England style and
Poetry

still has Pegasus on the cover and new poets
on the inside.
Vogue
and
Vanity Fair
are still
for sale. I wander out and watch the Fifth
and Monroe crowd again. It is Saturday, nine
o’clock in the evening, and the automobile
horns are deafening and the crossing policeman
is quite busy.

And now I have gone to a good old slapstick
movie, by a descendant of Charlie Chaplin,
and I am standing again on the corner and
it is half past ten. Many people are looking
up at the passing figures in the dance hall in
the third story over the theatre. Windows
are open and wild Singaporian music pours
out into the streets. There are great yellow
Singaporian lanterns hanging in front of the
open windows and yellower light is pouring
from the hall itself. It is one of the chain of
Yellow dance halls in the syndicate owned by
Kusuko and part of his political machine,
along with his chain of Coffee houses. This
particular place is called “The Hall of Velaska.”

There was a man who sat by me in the
movie laughing like a boy. He is now beside

108
me again. He is a gigantic black haired but
aged Jew, obviously the Rabbi Terence Ezekiel,
heretic, and planter of the Oaks of
Springfield. He is in most matters a henchman
of Boone and a political “scrapper,”
whose deeds have set the town ringing. We
are friends in a minute. He has seen me with
Avanel in his synagogue—takes me as a matter
of course, asks me to go with him to the
Tom Strong Coffee House and Restaurant,
just east of the Gaiety Theatre. There we encounter
Boone and the over-sensitive quivering
Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Third.
They are enjoying eleven o’clock salt mackerel
together. They take along with it the
knockout coffee of Kusuko, who owns all the
coffee houses under whatever name, new or
old.

And so the Rabbi and I join in these refreshments
and have a jolly midnight with
the heart of political and educational Springfield
and, as long as the Rabbi leads the argument,
there is more than enough wit in the
assembly. He has the Jewish turn for puns
and it is plain that Doctor Mayo Sims and
Kopensky have a second laughing foeman.

But amid the jokes the Rabbi is not a bit
backward about hatching local empires along

109
with this inbred Michael and this black-haired
descendant of Daniel Boone. Their present
campaign, which they do not conceal in its
tactics from me, their “cousin,” is, of course,
an effort to out-maneuver the Mayor. Kopensky
wants to bring cheap unskilled labor
to town, leaving out the usual University
entrance-examination. His ostensible reason
is that the World’s Fair buildings will not be
completed August 15, the date of opening,
without this aid. It is obviously but a maneuver
to bring more City Hall votes to town
and votes of a manageable type.

And so I talk politics with these three.
Boone proclaims that the presence this evening
of Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Third, is
an evidence that the Boones and the Michaels
can pull together from time to time and
the Rabbi and the lad seem completely ruled
by this headlong Boone who cannot eat mackerel
without glowering as though he were devouring
his enemies.

The other two are jollying him out of his
intensity and he seems to thank them for it.
He really relaxes a little toward midnight, as
though, after all, this is a festive occasion of
red blooded lads in a coffee house. As I
think it over, walking home alone, there is an

110
elusive impression that young Michael was
being given an extra show of confidence for
“reasons” by the apparently headlong older
gentlemen.

April 17:—I have been asking questions
about Drug Store Smith. It seems this person,
Smith, has aspirations, and values his
exceedingly nominal place among the scientific
chemists of America and will leave the
town any time to attend a congress of such,
where he receives due invitation:—and it is
part of the tactics of Boone to lure him out
when his vote will be an inconvenience. But it
is not always easy to get him sufficient honors
of this kind for he is not a benevolent scientist.
The charm of his tonics and beverages is
deemed specious, though some of them are
discreetly marked: “Highly recommended by
Doctor Mayo Sims.” “They say” he did some
sound chemical and biological research in his
youth in the Springfield University laboratories.

I have been asking questions and am beginning
to understand Coffee Kusuko. He
has a chain of coffee houses as long as Smith’s
chain of pharmacy-post-office-street-car-station-patent-medicine-confectionery-cigar-stand-and-soda-fountain
establishments. Kusuko

111
has made the black demi-tasse the special
Springfield vice and there are no deeper
addicts than those who fight him politically.

People feel quite sure his drink contains
some more sinister ingredient from the Malay
peninsula. And he it is who sees to it that all
the business offices are equipped with coffee
urns that whistle through the late afternoon:—the
custom of mixing business and coffee
having originated with his great great grandmother,
a famous local stenographer, who in
the end became lady mayor, through her stenographers’
guild. Politics and coffee are
hereditary with Kusuko.

In the legitimate organization which ministers
to this drinking habit, Kusuko has concealed
his henchmen, who bring him all
needed information and carry abroad all necessary
orders. And they have a considerable
opportunity to serve him. Drinking begins in
the offices at 4.30 P. M. and in the more fastidious
business groups with many forms, till
it is near to resembling the Japanese tea-ceremony.
Stenographers, some austere and
some luxurious, mingle with women political
leaders, such as Orator Carrie Moore, Portia,
the Singing Aviator, and others. These help
materially to make up the sum of grace and

112
bedevilment of the business and political day.
A little later people who are still restless and
do not want to go home drift off toward the
motion picture houses, or the drug stores or
the coffee houses of Kusuko.

As to the coffee houses, I make my tours
through many and find these places extraordinarily
varied in design, though the same general
average of a crowd is in most of them.
There is a Chinese-looking place called: “The
Opium Fish.” There is a place hung with
copies of Velasques, Goya, Sorolla, and others,
called: “The Spanish Gypsy.” This is a place
quieter than most. Then there is a kind of a
Jazz emporium with copper and brass decorations,
called “The Whing Whang Tree.”
There are two other places that specialize in
chop suey, called: “The Mock Duck” and
“The Fire Cracker King” and then I loaf in
“The Pig and the Goose,” and “The Sword
of the Skallawag,” etc. In these last two on
slightly raised platforms the Malay storytellers
sit cross-legged. They unroll the beautiful
ensnaring legends of the Malay peninsula
and the islands around it. These storytellers
appear occasionally in some of the
other coffee houses, also, along with negro
singers, etc.

And now comes Kusuko’s last touch, where

113
he has completely replaced the old political
functions of the American saloon, as an acceptable
harness for the social brigands.
There is always some allusion in the coffee
houses, some implication, that the next real
thing to do will be dancing, later in the evening,
in wonderful Yellow Dance Halls. These
are also owned by Kusuko and are the very
keystone of his system. I follow the drifting
tide of jolly good fellows several evenings and
it leads me inevitably to the halls before midnight.

They are never too near the coffee houses
and soda fountains and never too far away.
There is nothing on the surface to make one
apprehensive in the halls, except some very
daring social dancing. There is often a motion
picture show for part of the evening just
off the lounging hallway and place of promenade.
The crowd is not much below the average
of the regular Fifth and Monroe crowd
of all kinds of people.

April 20:—I attend this evening, at the invitation
of two prospective art students, a
session of the Board of Education. They explain
the session to me, while we sit in the
gallery and look down upon the general tempestuousness.

Boone is not only the presiding officer but

114
has the impression that he is the whole Board
of Education. Despite this they are fond of
him on the board, but row with him till the
men cuss before the ladies in desperate efforts
to hold him down, and keep him down, and
prevent his bullying the whole assembly out
of existence. He insults everybody mercilessly
and wags his black beard at them till they
quail and quake.

It is a joy, a sorrow, an amazement, and a
wonder to me to see people who look so much
like the old Prognosticator’s Club, fighting
away, and when I meet them all at the end
of the verbal war none of them see me except
as a casual bystander.

April 21:—I have had a jolly evening at
Tom Strong’s with my beloved Rabbi. Boone
is our inevitable theme in the end. The Rabbi,
as we drink the black coffee and eat the salt
mackerel, confirms my tentative remark that
Boone, as president of the Board of Education,
enforces its edicts, though few of the decrees
are those into which from the standpoint of
strategy, or even conviction, he can put his
private heart. But, the Rabbi points out, they
are all clubs with which Boone can pound the
Mayor’s majority in the city commission and
he backs the board’s edicts, every one, in
The

115
Boone Ax
, and ever so often forces something
through the council.

Boone is also University Professor, one
hour a week, and in his professorial special
pleading, which he excludes from his activities
as chairman of the Board of Education,
he presents to the University and the world a
new doctrine of health and economics, called:
“Boonism” by his followers, and “The Complete
Healing” in his text book.

The Rabbi expounds: “Boonism denounces
metal money for a starter. Boone’s
aversion to it has come through millionaires
burying their money and bringing out coins
one at a time. Boone advocates a special system
of paper currency for an economic remedy,
and as a means of abolishing millionaires.
So Kusuko allows only metal money
to be used in his places, which regulation
Boone, after some contests, has accepted with
a sense of humor, since he likes black coffee
and cannot deny it and wants a jolly place to
meet his friends. And meanwhile millionaires,
though forbidden by the constitution
to exist, keep on hiding money.”

According to the Rabbi:—“The most outstanding
prescription in the personal health
chapters of ‘The Complete Healing’ is the

116
Apple Amaranth orchard. The devotee is to
walk in the orchards summer and winter,
breathing the breath of the bark, blossoms,
apples, and leaves, with certain well-worded
philosophic meditations. In general Boone
condemns drugs, so there is a personal reason
for making war on him on the part of Smith
and Sims and their followers.

“The Amaranth Apple orchard, around
the grave of the Sangamon County pioneer
and saint, Hunter Kelly, is particularly esteemed
by the Boone following.”

But I cannot imagine Boone or any remotely
resembling imitator indulging in philosophic
meditations. I could rather imagine
him climbing a tree like a cinnamon bear,
only with more speed and fidgets.

117

CHAPTER VIII

THE NEW SPRINGFIELD FLAG AND THE STAR PLAN MAP FOR WHICH IT STANDS, INCLUDING THE DOUBLE WALLS ON THE FAR BORDERS OF THE CITY, BUILT LONG AGO BY RALPH ADAMS CRAM.

May 4, 2018:—I make an early afternoon
call on Avanel. First we mourn over the scene
outside, for Apple Amaranths and all are
nipped by the frost and from all over the
United States come reports that the peach
crop once more is blighted. Then Avanel is in
her most “young ladyfied” mood and complains
fondly of her father’s general code of
behavior. I gather the impression that her
ideal has no big black beard and no long curly
oily locks, no fashion of getting angry. She
is just the age when they palpitate between
fond indulgence of “father” and black fury
at his goat-like intractability to all plain suggestions
that he make a change in himself.
Boone being a widower and Avanel his only
child, she is his shepherdess most emphatically.

Meanwhile Avanel hand-embroiders a gorgeous

118
Springfield Flag and allows me to help
her untangle several skeins of red silk and in
general to play the idle dangler as well as I
can. I am quite aware I do not do it in the
off-hand manner I should. I am a little too
heavy with the silk but she admits that I do
not roar at the least tangle, as her father
might.

Anyway, the flag is finished. And just
as I begin to get what might be called “in
earnest” with Avanel, a lot of disgusting
young dandies, whose names I do not know,
come in for tea. And I am obliged to
stay and drink the stuff and I would rather
drink rain water off the roof of a soot-factory,
that’s what I would.

May 5:—I have seen in waking dreams, as
I walk on the edge of New Springfield, at the
prairie end of a shadowed deserted street, a
great open door into the deep of eternity
and, hovering above the great deep, Springfield,
when it becomes the perfect and transcendent
city. I look down upon towers so
packed together in a sheaf and the flags
so mighty, it seems but a fantasy of celestial
flagstaffs and pinnacles. There are many
flags of the International Government and
many flashes of the Star Spangled Banner.
But one flag stirs me the most. It is the one

119
embroidered with the very silk and with the
very same stitches I have seen Avanel put in
with much silly chat so lately. It is the flag
nearest. It is on a tower rising from the deep,
a neighbor, it seems, I can almost touch. But
as I look there are thousands of flags like it
suddenly unfurled on a myriad pinnacles of
the city below.

May 6:—All the city is mourning the
blighting of the season’s acorns and Amaranth
Apples and the buds of the Golden Rain
Tree. Almost all the boughs have the little
blackened tufts of buds and leaves. Avanel
meets me at the door in the evening. Her
father has given her a terrific scolding for
what she says is “nothing much” and she is
glad to walk and walk for miles and cool off
in the clear starry air. I get it out of her, she
has been trying to stop her father’s smoking.
But she is forgetting it and taking on her sibyl
mood. Later she confesses she has been trying
to get her father to cut his hair and
quit dyeing his left hand crimson and that
he has been trying to get her to dye her hand
and unbind her hair as a Boone should. So,
sore of heart, she is willing that we should
be true comrades in the midst of this universe.
And at once we are, as it were, brothers and

120
sisters of the stars. She goes so far as to take
my arm.

She agrees to my proposal that we pluck
out the mystery of the souls of our city’s
flags together, if two young creatures may
get such wisdom.

May 7:—Avanel this evening takes me to
call upon St. Friend, The Giver of Bread. It
is, in her eyes, quite a religious function. And
we are to inquire formally about flags. St.
Friend knows me not, though there is something
in his voice that goes back one hundred
years, and I dimly remember, in my double
consciousness, visits with a friend who had
much the same furniture, and some of the
same turns of phrase, but he had not the face
or figure of this man. We are by the open
fireplace, under the old lithograph of Alexander
Campbell. Flashing in the firelight, is
the old bookcase to the left, containing the
bound volumes of the
Millenial Harbinger

and Richardson’s old life of Campbell and all
the rest of it.

St. Friend, the Giver of Bread, is indeed an
old man, a little lame, leaning on a cane.
He is much over six feet tall, when straightened,
and with a smooth shaven countenance,
but looking as Abraham Lincoln might have

121
done, had he lived into another century
and grown grayer with no other sign of the
passing of the years. St. Friend, the Giver
of Bread, receives Avanel as a favorite daughter
and convert and indeed I feel in the air
the justification for my estimate of this girl.
In his presence she puts aside all vestige of
nonsense. It is Church to her to be with him.

St. Friend disgraces himself by taking the
oldest kind of a corncob pipe from a shelf
inside the fireplace and smoking like a chimney.
He asks Avanel if she cares and she
says, “No, certainly not.”

We get to the matter of the flags quite late
in the evening.

St. Friend tells how in his youth when
Apple-Amaranth blossoms had as now a
touch of red in the hearts, those hearts began
to be called, “The Blood of Hunter Kelly,”
and St. Friend suggests that the saying be
restored to its former place on the tongues
of Springfield, especially since the red and
white star in the municipal flag is copied
from this flower.

Then much of what he and Avanel have
to say to each other about the flag he declares
he will put into his next sermon. It is
plain to me that this gray mind leans for vitality

122
upon the mind of the proud young
child. She knows it not but only thinks herself
a kind of playmate in a solemn way.

On the way home Avanel is much ashamed
of herself for staying so long and says that I
am an awkward lummox, and I can walk
home my own way.

Therefore I make my speech, as I take her
sternly to her door. She holds herself straight
as a ramrod, with lips stubbornly pursed together,
as I say:

“Your name is Springfield. If there is any
banner of the soul flying above me, your name
is written on it and the white is the pride that
makes you so angry and the red is the
strength that makes you an Amazon, and the
blue of the flag is the prairie sky, of which
you are the vainest, loveliest daughter.”
Avanel goes into the house with a sharp
“Goodnight.”

May 8:—It is a blazing spring day and
everything that was not frosted is getting
quite green. Baby carriages are abroad, with
the pink darlings crowing within them, welcoming
the sun. The streets are full of spring
finery. About four o’clock on this jolly afternoon
I meet Rabbi Terence Ezekiel in Tom
Strong’s. We fill up on rousing coffee and I

123
manage to get the conversation around to the
Springfield flag about which I am endlessly
curious.

The Rabbi says:—“The star of red and
white in the heart of the flag, being the twenty-first
star in the design, indicates, in the
official interpretation, that Illinois was the
twenty-first state admitted to the Union and
the red part indicates Springfield, the capital.”
But Rabbi Ezekiel prefers the idea that
this red and white star indicates in the year
2018 the coming of age of Illinois and America.

May 10:—It is Sunday morning, and I am
in the Great Cathedral of St. Peter and St.
Paul with Avanel. The whole picture is clean
cut around me. Every word and whisper
is clear. There are no clouds at all. Yet the
Cathedral is indeed gigantic. I am reminded
of majestic Notre Dame in Paris. It is the
same combination of styles, and St. Friend begins
his sermon with an appeal for a special
fund to add the steeples. As in cathedrals of
Europe, only the rectangular foundations of
the spires, a little higher than the roof, are
in place.

He preaches the sermon, which Avanel
helped him build, which touches on the flag:

124
“Visitors to the Fair may care to know
the path of white around the red star of
Springfield is the map of our five-pointed system
of double walls and within them a star-plan
system of avenues. This system, like this
star, is a symbol of the relation of Springfield
to all the outside world. The top of the star
points north to Chicago by way of the outerwall
gate at Mason City. Tomorrow the corn
dragon engines begin to take that route. They
are to be dedicated with honors that I hope
all who hear me will be there to endorse
and acclaim. The star-point, indicating northeast,
starts our flying machine trip over
the inner-wall gate at Illiopolis and the outerwall
gate at Warrensburg and on to Danville,
if you please, and to New York and the sea
journey to the capital of the International
Government, which government is looked to
with loyalty by all patriots and honorable
men. Highways running parallel to the air
lines in this direction are haunted by memories
of Johnny Appleseed, in the regions of
Fort Wayne, Indiana, and Massilon, Ohio.
The roads are of some distinction in all the
fruit and flower religions of Springfield. Our
city sends pilgrims that way in the spring
who will yet replant the whole world in glory
with many a sacred grove. But the southeast

125
point of the Springfield star system is a road
that passes through the inner-wall gate at
Taylorville and the outer at Pana, and points
in the direction of Virginia and Richmond.
Our fruit and flower devotees take all roads,
but because of the wonders of the early southern
spring many of them deem this the
holiest way. There are found, more than
other where, the botanizing pilgrims of the
faiths of my friend Rabbi Terence Ezekiel
and my friend Mother Grey and her daughter
Roxana. There many of the Rabbi’s young
oaks have sprung up in the name of universal
righteousness and that way he still takes his
pilgrimage, according to the mystical doctrine
of the Oak which is the foundation of
our Rabbi’s dreams. This road goes through
New Harmony, Indiana, before it turns south
into Kentucky. Many pilgrims pass that way
to do honor to the original home of the Golden
Rain Tree of Democracy.

“The point in the star-plan system of boulevards
that becomes a road passing through
the inner-wall gate at Modesta and the outer
at Palmyra starts the fancy moving along a
certain classic flying-machine route over Alton
and St. Louis, southwest to the tremendous
motion-picture studios of the Los Angeles

126
region and the radical educational institutions
evolved from them, which are so great
a peril to the land. This air route I call ‘The
Path of Ill Learning.’ It is constantly travelled
by our motion-picture educators and
artists who go to exchange ideas and refresh
themselves at Los Angeles, that great seat of
spiritual lies.”

At this point Avanel frowns; indeed she
will not be bullied out of her movies. But
she grows grave again and she takes earnestly
what else he has to say:

“The star-point indicating northwest with
the inner gate at Ashland and the outer at
Virginia is the one that interests me most.
There are three orders of discipline in connection
with this Cathedral. The newest is the
Order of the Blessed Bread of the More Liberal
Observance, in whose name we are to
have the great bread distribution on June
the eighth. The one a little older is The Order
of the Blessed Bread of the Strict Observance,
a discipline for those lost in despair and determined
to seize one more hope, if there be
one, before they consent to die.

“But the oldest order, the darling of the
founder of the greater work of this Cathedral,
is the order of the Pilgrimage, founded here

127
seventy-five years ago by St. Scribe of the
Shrines, now gone to his reward. And the
road northwest, as all but strangers in the
city know, leads from the first shrine, which
is the tomb of Lincoln, through the gates at
Ashland and Virginia, straight north to Havana
and the classic land of Spoon River and
Lewiston, to North Dakota and the coast, and
so on around the world to the hundred shrines.
How many young pilgrims have turned back
before they reached the outer gate at Virginia,
held more by soul’s weakness than by
bodily weariness, within the double walls
built so long ago by Ralph Adams Cram! But
some here present today have continued the
not too difficult journey and have returned to
live within these double walls again and
adore the Host upon this altar.”

They have taken the ocean ships or airships
of Seattle, they have gone afoot and by
every known vehicle through Asia. It is a
journey unforgettable—to the holy land of
Confucius and to his holy grave, to the
Blessed Bohdi Tree of Buddha, to the bathing
places of Benares, to the holy places of Mecca,
Jerusalem, Assisi, Rome, Lourdes, and London.
I, too, in my youth, with a fiery young
company from Springfield made this pilgrimage

128
which was first undertaken by St.
Scribe and written down later in his little
book of Discipline called: ‘The Hundred
Shrines.’ We went by motor, by steamship,
by flying machine, but whenever possible,
afoot. Let the visitor in this audience note
that he who prays at these shrines, according
to the office of The Brotherhood of The Hundred
Shrines, has made, we think, the true
beginning of life for a modern soul.

“Every shrine is a modern Station of the
Cross. Between shrine and shrine, await
many desperate foes of the soul. And so I
have often called it ‘The Road to Heaven and
Hell.’ There is no nominal way to take this
discipline. He who is a little hurt by this discipline
is destroyed.”

May 11:—Avanel and I are taking lunch
together at the Fire Cracker King Restaurant
and Coffee House. She is, indeed, giving her
absent father a scolding. It seems that Black
Hawk Boone has presumed to “offer advice.”
And she “hates him.” I venture to inquire
wherein he has been so presumptuous as to
attempt to guide her wandering feet. And it
seems that he thinks she is too fond of long
rehearsals for the celebration of the festival
of St. Scribe, May fifteenth in the Gordon

129
Craig Theatre, and not enough devoted to the
Amazonian drill ground. He wants three
drills a week, not two. He says we may be at
war with Singapore any day and she cannot
dance to victory and had best quit religious
dancing, till after the war. My reply is quite
deft. I insist that I, at least, am prepared to
appreciate her dancing and am only waiting
the next appearance at the Gordon Craig
Theatre and she continues to scowl but says I
have but till the fifteenth to wait. It is now
about two in the afternoon and we are going
to hear some speeches. Avanel explains to me
that the first Corn Dragon Engines are starting,
with great ceremony, to Chicago and we
are to hear orations at the station before they
go. The transportation district centering in
Illinois has, through Eric Hedder, a ploughboy
from near Cairo, evolved a type of a dragon
engine, a mate to the dragon-fly flying
machine. A complete set of these engines
have just been finished for the Springfield and
Chicago division. They are equipped with
silvery horns instead of shrill whistles. The
exercises are, of course, at the gigantic Union
Depot at Tenth and Washington. The passengers
of honor include this Eric Hedder, the
Mayor and some of his political enemies, including

130
Black Hawk Boone, who is making
the speech of the afternoon. This prospect
seems to please his daughter fairly well, considering
how she hates him. But now we are
there, and Boone is already speaking:

“You all know that my Kentucky forbears
went west and settled down near Cairo, Illinois,
and also that I feel no odium in the
appellation ‘Egyptian.’ Possibly the name of
the region, ‘Egypt, Illinois’ derives from the
fact that there is an older Cairo, in Egypt.
Then Memphis, Tennessee is not so far away.
Possibly the floods and the malaria and the
frogs and the languor and the witchcraft of
legend, where the Ohio comes rolling down
into the swamps, help out the Egyptian idea.
The time was when ‘Egypt’ meant, exclusively,
that part of Illinois by Cairo. Now it
is applied in derision to all down state Illinois,
by the peanut politicians of Chicago. In
a whirlwind world, independent languor becomes
a virtue, and meditation engenders a
finer art than any nervousness.”

Here Avanel whispers to me: “He is a
great one to prate of languor.” But now her
father is mentioning an artist she admires.

“Eric Hedder, who designed these engines,
is a ploughboy from near my home-town of
Cairo. The corn dragons are indeed messengers

131
from Egypt to Chicago, and other where.
The corn-dragon engine is a giant wound-up
mechanical toy but something more. It is a
kind of citizen, through its Egyptian soul,
and through the soul of the engineer who happens
at any time to inhabit it. He is one of
our new type of aristocracy. The older aristocracies
indicated their worth by having
themselves photographed in the midst of their
athletic sports, at the race track, or playing
golf or croquet, or in soldier’s uniform. But
in this year of grace, 2018, they are depicted
as amateur or professional railroad engineers,
or the like. To hold so many lives in trust
and to discharge the obligation year after
year without faltering is classed as the occupation
of a scholar and a gentleman. And so,
as is the case of all special privilege, the
chariot of privilege is decorated and starred
and given plumes like the corn and made
glorious.

“To me this is a journey from the State of
Illinois to somewhere else. Loyalty to Chicago
is a commendable thing in itself, but
Chicago is the commercial center of the entire
United States, and the only way to keep it
from tipping and teetering the state clean
over, is to bring forward other than commercial
considerations. Loyalty to Chicago is loyalty

132
to Florida and California, Oregon and
Maine. These are all of them quite commendable
commonwealths. But loyalty to Springfield
is the distinctive sign of loyalty to Illinois.

“The engines will rush back, bringing
skilled mechanics, wise industrial statesmen,
and world leaders in art for little Springfield,
down here in Egypt. Such people are held
in infinitely higher honor here than in the
Chicago that made them. All men and women
seem to have increased in vanity in this year
2018, and this is a highly commendable
change. I rejoice that citizens of the United
States now live upon honor and its power
more than upon the desire for mere currency.
So the corn-dragons will always be robbing
Chicago, America’s commercial capital, of
her best. People will keep coming here for
much smaller salaries and for more passionate
praise. [Applause!]

“I hope that the whizzing and whistling of
these engines, henceforth more musical than
of old, will be the war cry of our whole
Egyptian village and countryside. I hope
that for generation after generation many
dragons of this breed will whirl by, and many
another ploughboy, sighting them through

133
the cornfields, will not only catch the original
vision of Eric Hedder, but new untamed
dreams of art and glory and creation will be
engendered on such days.

“Without haste, without rest, our rewards
and appreciations pay for our creations. Let
the young Egyptian patriot see these dragons
as big brothers that sweep through the high
growing corn armies, messengers flying from
county to county, crying in the trumpet glory
of their silver voices, that art and life are
married in the region of the capital.” [Great
Applause!]

Avanel admits that her father had to
roar in this case, for the crowd was large,
and, speaking from a station platform in
the open air, the loudest man cannot be
heard with traffic going by and newsboys
selling extras about the event before it happens.
We walk just a little south along the
viaduct on Tenth from the great New Union
Depot to a most familiar and ancient structure,
a kind of rough memorial shrine, which
was once the station whence the Lincoln presidential
train left for Washington and where
Lincoln gave his parting word to the City
of Springfield. Outside the door of the museum,
Avanel and I re-read Lincoln’s famous

134
farewell to his fellow citizens, cast in bronze
and set up for a tablet long ago.

Then, being in the mood of reminiscence,
we walk past the Lincoln residence and
Avanel begins to compare Lincoln to Jesus
and speak of him as the greatest person sent
to men since Jesus. And I think the sibyl
has at last permanently emerged and that my
companion is finally with me.

But there is a devil in this Avanel. And
so she says, partly because she thinks it, and
partly because she knows it will annoy me:
“I wonder if the Lincoln residence was located
among the best people when it was
built?” And then, as the silence grows deadly
on my side of the conversation: “My grandmother
once told me that Mrs. Lincoln was
really a fashionable person and not of poor-white
stock like Lincoln and I am glad to
hear it. He must have been a great trial to
her, with her refined instincts.”

My silence growing even more deadly she
continues:—“I am sorry the Lincoln residence
is not in a more fashionable region today. I
wonder if they can move it out by the Country
Club. Springfield is all ‘society,’ you know,
and you might as well admit it.... I
wish if they leave the residence here they

135
would move these common houses and build
a great Greek Temple over the Lincoln home,
and make a park for about two hundred yards
each way and have big avenues leading up
to it and allow no common person to live
anywhere near here. Lincoln was after all the
greatest person since Jesus and we ought to
show some sense of it.”

We stroll on and on, and Avanel, being not
yet twenty, as this world counts the years, is
somewhat forgiven for these discursive remarks.
She does not want to be forgiven, and
hates my pious forbearance and at last says:
“I simply cannot stand that cheap cowboy
hat you wear. It is simply a ridiculous pose
or else the instinct of a rotter.”

So I take Miss Avanel Boone firmly by the
arm and turn her toward town and at my insistence
we step into the first gentlemen’s
furnishing store we encounter and I urge her
to help the clerk pick out a hat for me. They
select one that is hardly a hair’s breadth different
from the one I have been wearing. I
pay for it in paper money, “to please old
Black Hawk Boone,” as I explain to the
humorous clerk. Avanel seems placated by
this quip, though there is no reason on earth
why she should be. She begins to behave like

136
a Christian at once and stays so, all the way
to her door. And I bid her good evening
and she gives me the word I may soon see her
dancing.

137

CHAPTER IX

TEMPEST IN A TEAPOT OVER WHETHER PEOPLE WITH BURIED GOLD SHALL MONOPOLIZE THE FLYING PRIVILEGE.

May 15, 2018:—It is the evening of this
day and Avanel is quite busy in her parlor
with costumes. I am invited for dinner with
her and old Boone. I am to help her immediately
after to the theatre with her costumes
that I am to carry in two heavy suitcases.
Three friends of Avanel’s have prepared the
dinner and serve it in true communal fraternity.
According to their chatter the coming
event is all in the spirit of a college lark or
grand commencement occasion, rather than a
churchly event.

But when I sit in the Gordon Craig Theatre,
strangers to the right and left of me, the
theatre darkened and the stage a temple
steps, the Avanel emerges that has refused so
many times to come forth at my petition. Her
face and carriage convey the sibyl, the saint,
the mother of great sages of our city and the
muse of poets of our city. She hardly knows
this, for the innocence of her unspoiled youth
tells its gentle, overwhelming story. As for

138
the alleged dance, it is more procession than
anything else: boys and girls, men and
women, moving to varied chants or measured
silences or amid wonderful and measured
lights. There is no very direct allusion
to the Birthday of St. Scribe. Old
political parades are suggested and historical
triumphs, but mostly the type of parade that
might be held of a Sunday before a religious
service, ending at a shrine or an altar.
There are ceremonies from the book of St.
Scribe of the Shrines. His favorite shrines
are suggested, beginning with the Grave of
Lincoln at Oak Ridge. The dancers are
crowned with Apple-Amaranth leaves, which
are larger than ordinary apple-leaves and a
paler green. Avanel’s part in the pageantry
is but that of a leader and partner of the chief
marching man, young Joseph Bartholdi
Michael, the Third. Avanel is closely followed
in glory and significance by the whole company.
And Michael deftly takes his place as a
proper background for Avanel, for which I
thank him. Therefore when Avanel sits with
me a little by her open fire tonight, all tired
out and very solemn, she knows she has vindicated
herself in my eyes a little and she tosses
her head and wears jauntily one young green

139
Apple-Amaranth leaf which still gleams
brightly in her black hair.

She asks, as a child: “Did it seem as
though we were at shrines together or
walking in the woods together?” And so I
answer: “I have never yet been at any of
these shrines but that of Lincoln and that
many, many years ago. But it did seem as
though we were walking in the woods together
among the very oldest trees. I want
to go to shrines with you soon.”

And Avanel asks me: “Do you think we
will get on better in woods?”

And so I answer, not quite to the point:
“A tree a thousand years old has leaves in
the spring, as green as when a sapling. But
if my dust had lived to this hour, it would
have been the semblance of a palsied man, a
horror more than grave clothes. Such as I
am, I pray to the God of Heaven that I may
be the green leaf in your hair.”

May 16:—I find myself walking in the
shadows, where there is neither Springfield
nor Jerusalem nor any other known place,
where there is neither calendar nor clock nor
sun. The clouds of meditation are beneath
my feet, storm overhead. One flash of lightning
lasts for an eternity and the thunder
roll is as long.

140
May 17:—I walk with Avanel again
through our town. As we pass beneath the
splendid and soaring towers, we note the signs
of the various citizens who occupy the shops,
facing the street. As we pass the ladies’
tailoring establishments, we see fancy dress
and religious costuming, to be used for ceremonials
such as the festival of Hunter Kelly.
They are carefully made, these costumes, for
permanent and individual use. Many people,
men and women, pass us on the street well
fitted out, splendid, yet realistic, off hand,
casual, and unconcerned, citizens in all sorts
of well fitting, brightly dyed ceremonial gear.
It is rather the custom of the city to come out
more and more gaily for the spring, summer
and autumn. In the cold weather it is the
idea to dress as of old and according to the
customs of the United States, in routine garments.

And now, being light hearted, Avanel and
I make an amusement of going the rounds of
the more fancy ice-cream parlors. They bear
the old names, Maldener’s, Kutrakon’s, Bonansinga’s,
Stuart’s, and there is the beautiful
place of Najim, the Syrian. Stuart’s is
conducted by a direct descendant of the original
family, as also Bonansinga’s. Some of

141
the places are in the hands of new firms but
keep the old names.

The sign-painters’ shops are a wilderness
of bedevilment. They are almost official extensions
of the art department of the World’s
Fair of the University of Springfield. They
are full of everything that may be painted to
bring rejoicing to the fastidious stranger.

It is growing toward evening and my dear
lady has signified that she will consent to
eat with me in that restaurant room of glass,
that high tower place, where she gave me my
first view of the new city. And, as we walk
that way, we are amazed at something as
novel to her as to myself. We have been almost
noting it to one another all day. With
glowering faces and ugly looks, two factions
in costume are passing and re-passing one
another. And there are threats of fist fights
between the young men and some appointments
for real battles without gloves are obviously
made, with those euphuisms that in
the old day covered appointments for pistol
deeds.

There are two factions of aviators, one
dressed somewhat in the color scheme of the
robin, including the vest, which follows the
red color of the breast of that bird. The rival

142
faction are the Snobs, who are out with it,
make no quibble about being snobs, and are
costumed with hints of the wasp and bee.
There are as many girls and women, as boys
and men, in the Snob and Robin costumes.
All this has sprung up from the ground in a
few days and is not in the pageant and festival
calendar of the city. The aviator’s day
for dressing up is in early October. But the
surprise is not so much the new costumes as
the increasing sharpness of the controversy.
Most of the children of the Boone and Michael
clans, rivals though they be, are dressed as
Robins and expound to us their side of a complicated
matter. The substance is that the
city is liable to a riot over the use and monopoly
of the flying machines by the Snobs, led
by one John Nash, sometimes called “Beau
Nash,” and the Snobs are defying their enemies
and spoiling for a riot. While Avanel
and I have our customary little dinner in
what was once a quiet corner, two young
Booneites we have previously interviewed,
having finished their chocolate, come to us
and roar their anger again in our ears and
seek to recruit our good opinions, as they
nerve themselves to subdue the Snobs and if
necessary shoot holes in their machines.

May 18:—The costumes of the rival factions

143
have disappeared from these streets. All
noise and argument have disappeared. The
city goes about the even tenor of its way. The
papers are full of the social and military affairs
of the Amazons and the Horseshoe
Brotherhood and denunciations of the world’s
common enemy, Singapore. I am wondering
why I have never gone to Camp Lincoln
to see these Amazons and Michaelites drilling
in full panoply of war and wondering
even more why the child Avanel is at the
head of them. She must be a sort of “daughter
of the regiment,” as one may say, decorative
royalty, with the real management in
other hands. But I always speak in her presence
of military matters as though she were
in actual command. Tonight I meet her near
her home as she comes riding from Camp
Lincoln on her white war pony. She is a centauress.

Not only is her pony white but every
thread of her riding habit is white. I help
her down from her pony, go through the entirely
unnecessary motion of doing so, and we
lead the tired steed around to the stable in the
rear of the Boone cottage and old Boone is
there, waiting to feed and water the creature.
The father is ignored and the horse is spoken

144
to by Avanel in terms of endearment. We
go into the house and sit by that unlit
fireplace and wait for Black Hawk to come
in to dinner. All of which is, by the way,
preliminary to the fact I wish here to
record, that the tired Avanel draws from her
belt an old hunting knife and its heavy white
sheath and puts it on the mantle with the
unbuckled Avanel sword and sheath, then allows
me to take them down, and answers my
questions about the knife.

“This is the hunting knife my remote ancestor,
Daniel Boone, carried into the wilderness
of Kentucky in his first discovery of the
blue grass region that was to him new Eden....
This hunting knife means more to me
than pride in fighting blood. It may go
through the heart of some cocaine-crazy creature
in far Asia. But it means that other
thing to me, the sanctity of the log cabin, or
the cottage which we must defend as Boone
defended the first cabins in the blue grass. To
him they were pavilions of new patriarchs,
not barnyards or forts.”

May 19:—By this time all the trees are putting
forth their second leaves, and smaller
blossoms than before the frost. But everyone
is rejoicing for it is spring of a sort. The air
is filled with hovering branches in palest

145
green, a good gift to man. The town knows
it and walks abroad gaily, this morning of
May nineteenth.

Then, late in the afternoon, local war
breaks out suddenly and we know nothing
about the trees, and care less. It is a Springfield
utterly new and terrible to its citizens.
The star chimes are not allowed to ring. I
am with Comrade Avanel in the very top of
the Truth Tower. The terrors of flight and
pursuit sweep over the far sections of Springfield
given over to aviation fields, orchards
and the like.

When machines overtake each other there
is, so far, no shooting or the like, only a
veering to the right or left. It might be a
game of tag, were it not for the symbolism
in decoration put on by the two factions driving
the machines. There is a big death’s head
painted near the front of every Snob machine,
and the hunting knife of Daniel Boone
painted on the front of every Robin Redbreast
machine.

Neither Black Hawk Boone nor Avanel has
authorized any such use of this symbol. The
whole threat and roaring are unauthorized
by any of the leaders of factions. The
“People” have escaped the leash.

Avanel is the only reporter her father will

146
trust tonight and she has come to the top
room of the Truth Tower, because it is the
observation and news gathering room for
things that may be untangled from a tower.
All the papers have made common cause tonight.
All the telescopes are in use, looking to
the borders just beyond the City Wall, the
borders of Morgan, Menard, Logan, Macon,
Christian, Montgomery and Macoupin Counties.
The news is assembled and everything
observed is explained by telephones from
these regions and re-telephoned into the various
offices and rewritten there and then telegraphed
to all the world that cares. Newsgathering
remains what it has been for a century
and a half. Boone is at the opposite end
of the phone from Avanel and the first definite
effects of the threatened air-riot are to make
that gentleman quite profane.

The flying machines were at first not
public property. But so much crowding
out of the truly skilled flyers came about
by the monopolists with buried gold, that machines
are now rented to private citizens by
the state or city for a nominal fee and deposit
for damages. To enter the examinations in
the autumn and to fly for the year is, in
theory, one of the privileges of highly skilled,
athletic people. Our friend, Portia, the Singing

147
Aviator, is with  us tonight and helping
unravel the story of the rise of factions.
And the gentle creature has written of
the uppermost blue and of the dawn clouds
and of the map of the earth and of sailing
around the curve of the earth. This young
girl is appalled to be obliged to take sides in
the controversy and enlist for a possible battle
of mere children. The most famous aviators
on each side come from the High Schools.
She does not want to paint war insignia upon
her machine. But already her literary imitators
have done so. Her three most sedulous
apes in the High School, John Nash and Findlay
Bryson and Margaret Rand, who have diluted
her innocent and heroic songs, turning
them into society verses, now demand that
she put the death’s head upon her machine, or
lose them as disciples. And Portia is appalled
to find that the names she once chose in sport
to classify the machines are now used to represent
actual factions in the threatened war.
The Robin Redbreast and Carrier-Pigeon
machines are all on the side of the Robins,
and the Snobs are subdivided into the Don
Juan, the Raider, the Flamboyant, the Brahmin
and the Bird of Paradise. It is the exceedingly
high priced Brahmin and Bird of
Paradise machines that make the trouble.

148
People go to the High Schools past their
twenty-first year. And the town is first torn
up by High School pupils, children of the
local multimillionaires, such of them as still
have brains and body enough to go through
the rigid examinations for aviation. These
children of men with buried gold are again
and again at the top of the aviation waiting-lists.
This is especially exasperating because
having a private fortune is proclaimed in
every political speech to be against the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Illinois.

And so youngsters of the Wicked Standings,
the Cheerful Radleys, the Arrogant
Rocks, the Fat Zebeskys, the Nervous Kusukos,
the Slick Slack Kopenskys, the Shrewd
Sims family, and all that set try successfully
to monopolize the priceless Brahmin and Bird
of Paradise. Their sinecure is defended in
silly verse by Findlay Bryson, John Nash,
sometimes called “Beau Nash,” and Margaret
Rand.

May 20:—Many of those parading the
streets in the Redbreast costume are skillful
High School seniors, young men and
women, licensed graduate aviators, whose
machine rent-money has been refused through
the quibbling of the corrupted authorities.

149
The only work left open to them is drilling for
the work of mail carriers for the International
Government. Word comes to the news room
at the top of the Truth Tower that all through
the counties touching the Springfield wall,
wherever Brahmin and Bird of Paradise machines
reach the ground, the farmers taking
Springfield affairs a little more seriously than
we do, proceed to set torch to the wings.

May 21:—The Robin Redbreast people can
work, at least, and their costume has now
flooded the offices. There is such a tension
everywhere (without the least thing really
happening) and the streets are so full of
marching Robins that the young sports say
today that they have surrendered. There is
much talk of peace and sentimental prattle
about our dear little town and slush about all
calling each other “cousin” again. But just
before midnight
The Boone Ax
gets out an
extra, charging that the Brahmin and Bird of
Paradise machines are tied up to the snob
children by long time leases and there is not
one but still remains in the hands of the owner
of a secret fortune or some directly obligated
minion of the same.

May 22:—The sky is all gold today. The
Snob machines reappear, defiantly gilded, and
on the front of every one is painted the name

150
of the Snob using it, and after his name the
word:—“Owner.” And young John Nash has
taken the fatal step and added a terrible element
to what was before but a family row
that was leading nowhere in particular. He
has decorated his machine with green jade
eyes and pictures of the green and speckled
lotus of the Cocaine Buddha of Singapore and
thereby added the final insult of “international
and national treason” and utterly
changed the spirit of the fight. All day the
gilded machines go by unmolested among the
angry Pigeons and Robins, but as Black
Hawk Boone says in a big type evening editorial:
“John Nash has tattooed himself
with treason forevermore and it remains to be
seen whether every gilded wing stands for
treason.”

May 23:—The University set today bring
forth legislation which is drawn up and sponsored
by John Boat and St. Friend, the Giver
of Bread. This emergency legislation, backed
by the immediate surrender and burning of
the arrogant leases, appears to insure uniform
rents for all machines of whatever class.
The fear of the curse of treason has made all
the gold-foil faction meek as rabbits for a
day. And so they consent to the cancellation
of all previous lists and papers of all sorts

151
and the re-enlistment of all aviators once a
month. They consent to the proposal that it
be made a jail offense to use the same machine
longer than three months. Machines
must be re-rented in order as registered. No
classification to be made as to value of machine,
or gold-foil on the wings, or type of
machine:—every aviator to take his chance.
St. Friend thinks that he and Justice of the
Peace, John Boat, have done well. Certainly
this afternoon, according to the new arrangement,
it is as in Utopia and the rich and the
poor, the privileged and unprivileged, have
equal chances in the air.

We are alone in the Truth Tower, my
love and I, and we are talking of St.
Friend, who has brought this all about,
and Avanel sends for him, to take in the view
of the sunset with us, if he pleases, and wait
with us for the returning star chimes. The
evening and its beauty, after such days of
empty stampede and panic, move my lady
Avanel to deeper words than are her habit.
And of the coming guest, she whispers:—“St.
Friend represents, almost in spite of
himself, the idea of thousands of laymen, that
few priests have represented:—the general
idea of religion, under a church roof, with
one’s fellow human beings. The idea stands

152
in contrast to any worship chained to a special
list of teachings. St. Friend champions
freedom, yet his kind of freedom goes to
prayer, of its own choice, with no theological
or creed fences, to what he calls, ‘the blessed
company of all faithful people.’”

St. Friend comes to us, just before the star
chimes begin to ring. He steps out from the
noiseless elevator and is before us while we
are speaking. Avanel pets him as she does
her father when she is being especially good,
and the aged guest likes it, of course. He
sits in the largest and easiest chair which
is reserved for guests in
The Boone Ax
room,
and he hunches forward, a stooped giant. He
looks through the top of his eyebrows at
Avanel and he keeps time to his armchair
talk, beating the arms of the chair slowly with
his open hands, according to a habit from of
old. He rubs his face and his old forehead
with his palms as though to wake up and
deliberately brings a flush to his forehead.
By incessantly beating the chair and humming
and hawing he seems to beat up a kind
of nervous strength from some hidden source
in the air and talks with increasing animation
about the “strike” or “riot” or “whatever
it may be called” and mentions with great
complacency his measures against it. And

153
now another curtain seems to lift from the
soul of Avanel. The spirit of prophecy is
upon her. The old man listens with fixed
eyes. The youth of his immortal soul seems
to me, in this hour of revelation, to depend
upon clear speaking on the part of this young
voice. She is denouncing with endless words
the ironies of flying and material dreams,
yet with girl slang and wit mixed in with
it all.

154

CHAPTER X

THE END OF THE FLYING MACHINE RIOTS, PANICS, ALARUMS AND EXCURSIONS.

May 24:—Today with that same light in his
eye, St. Friend preaches back at Avanel the
sermon she preached to him last evening with,
of course, many turns of his own. I sit with
her quite close to the pulpit of the Cathedral.
The place is packed to the doors.

“You all know my aversion to the motion
picture. It is one element in the university
about which I differ from the majority of the
board. If I express an equal distrust of the
flying machine, you will say I am probably
against all mechanical advancement.

“Such advancement is but a qualified gift
to man. The best wings are spirit wings, however
we fly with them. It is better to be like
Shelley than to have the glory of Langley and
Wilbur and Orville Wright.

“I deeply mourn that Springfield has been
almost ready to bleed and die over the flying-machine
issue. I am sorry that either our
good or our bad people are obsessed. The
father of the souls of many of our young

155
people seems the telegraph, the mother, the
railroad. There does not appear to be a filament
of their minds made of anything more
human than the uncanny filament of the incandescent
light. When they peer into the
future of our city, they imagine our optical
factories and the like, hard at work producing
things like the new lens gun but more ingenious.
The odor of acids is ever on their
garments, never the incense of some future
Christmas day. They envy the discovery
of the three new infinitesimal elements by
the chemists of Singapore. No wonder some
of them finally turn to the green and speckled
lotus and the cocaine Buddha.

“The service this type of imagination has
done our city is calculable, definite. People
moved by it have made our factories the most
notable of the kind in this region of the United
States. And they give us also an airship
of the mind that carries us far into the future
and we return heavily ladened. We examine
the treasure. It is a funny little creature
called ‘man,’ carrying an extraordinary world
conquering device, some amorphous, dubious
toy, akin to the ancient phonograph.

“Let us agree that whatever carries bread
across the world is of service. Whatever puts
a roof over the head of democracy is worth

156
while. Whatever puts clothing on the back of
mankind must be respected. And because
they fetch and carry well, such gifts as the
dragons of Eric Hedder are not to be gainsaid
in this place.

“But let us not hesitate to examine such
devices and consider where this matter of
toy-making is going to lead us. Will the millennial
future be a tin and wire world, an electrical
experiment station, and no more?

“We compare it to the automobile. The advantage
is all on the side of the flying machine.
The automobile is a sort of racing hog.
The flying machine is, by comparison, a wild
swan. And, crossing world oceans, it works
for world unity.”

Avanel’s face is taking on the deepest crimson
I have ever seen upon it. About every
tenth sentence is her own. St. Friend laughs,
the congregation supposes, at his own wit.
He continues:—

“And for the fatness of the overfed automobile
driver we substitute the leanness of
the bird-boned boy or girl aviator. The flying
machine is a representative of the perilous
privilege of physical aspiration. But
what goes up must come down. The aviator
is sure of a return journey. Portia will tell
us, in an exalted mood, that the aviator is up

157
there to investigate the great milky way for
us. She will tell us that clouds and sky now
enter into the pleasure landscape of democracy.
She makes it plain to us that the tops
of the sunset towers, of the man-built Truth
Tower, are not the top of the Universe.

“‘The Aviator,’ she says, ‘is our delegate
to the congress of planets.’ Yet if we agree
with every song of Portia, there is even more
to be said for looking out upon the fields from
no higher point of vantage than the footpath,
if we be taking such a pilgrimage as that of
St. Scribe of the Shrines, beginning with the
first shrine, the Tomb of Lincoln, and praying
the prayers St. Scribe has written down
for us, as we go around the world to the one
hundred shrines of the one hundred religions.
We may take part of that journey by steamship
and airship but it is when we are afoot
we gain wisdom.” And so St. Friend, the
Giver of Bread, continues upon his favorite
theme of “The Pilgrimage” and urges upon
us that life is a glorious adventure and was
never meant to be a matter of merely mechanical
achievement or cold calculation for physical
power. And Avanel’s heightened color
continues.

But what is the real Avanel? As we leave
church, we look up and she shrieks with delight.

158
Every known variety of machine is in
long line, is in cavalry formations in which
she delights, some of which she uses with her
own Amazons, and she shouts the orders
and claps her hands and tries to anticipate
each new maneuver with her orders, like
chanticleer crowing, and ordering the sun to
rise. She stands amid the purple cottages
like a fairy in a bed of violets and it is as
though all the butterflies of the Sangamon
Valley land had become gorgeous giants for
us and were flying for our delight. For overhead
friend and foe are celebrating truce, if
not peace, and the whole remaining populace
is in the street to behold it.

May 25:—I am reading in the Truth Tower,
in the newspaper lookout room, last evening’s

Boone Ax
with Avanel and talking it
over with her. It seems that the inside political
whispers convey to the intelligent the fact
that Mayo Sims has sent out his dragnet:—his
jesters, his druggists, his coffee house
wits, to talk among the older people and get
their youngsters in hand. And he has been
strongly abetted by the arrogant Rock family.

The arrogant Rock family have other, if
limited, claims to consideration. They have
rightly prided themselves on being experts

159
on the coal question. Some of the most offensive
of them are indeed learned in this
matter. It remains a family talent and accomplishment,
when nothing else can be said for
these people. For many a day, and indeed
for two generations, on behalf of the city and
state, they have been flying from mine to
mine in their working hours, giving expert
advice or exercising stern authority, according
to their specific offices.

The Rock family began as the Michaelites
began. For a long time it was a tradition that
every boy of the Rock clan must dig coal with
the pick for a certain number of years, and
belong to the Miner’s Union. But these people
gradually rose from labor-union officers,
who dug, in a nominal way, to able but
unwholesome fops who would rather be
hanged than dirty their own hands in coal.

They hate the Michaelites in a very special
way for going doggedly and literally on with
their horse-shoeing and hammering out
swords. But the Rock family know when they
have had enough and hate the open accusation
of Singaporianism that is the result of the
antics of “Beau Nash.”

It seems that “Beau Nash” has become
a fanatic, he has been initiated into the

160
devilish religion, and he defies the committee
from Mayo Sims, Slick Slack Kopensky,
and the Rocks, that has subdued all
the other young representatives of the flying
snobs. He says he will do as he pleases, and
do it soon, that this is a land of religious
liberty, that he chooses the green glass god
of Singapore, of his own free will, and there
is no treason in it, that he will have the law
on whoever molests him.

Now there are shouting and cries below
and there are jinglings of all the phones in
the lookout rooms and when we answer one
we are told that Nash has already ascended
and is coming from the west. Almost instantly
we see him and then he is directly
above the Truth Tower, circling, going up,
and circling and going down, while his own
old faction, in the street, grow angrier every
minute. He has painted his whole machine
the Singaporian green and there are all the
special signs and seals of Singapore he can
put there, upon the body of his machine, and
finally, in insult to our virtuous city, he flies
low that we may see them and then flies high
that we may hate him.

But on his third descent, a Robin Redbreast
machine, with all speed on, sweeps up from
the north. Nash expects a threat, but the

161
man in the other machine begins to shoot
at Nash, just as he is above Washington Park,
and down comes the dead man by the Washington
Park Pavilion, with a terrific crash
of broken wings, and absurd Singapore has
her first American martyr.

The newspaper people come pouring into
the Truth Tower. We all send the story to the
papers as we can. It seems that the avenger
is the son of the Mayor. It is “Crawling Jim
Kopensky,” the new President of the Robin
Redbreast flying association. He has been
president twenty-four hours and has made
haste to vindicate his office.

Of course there will be no prosecution of
Jim. In the first place he is the son of the
Mayor. In the second place he is now a newspaper
hero. In the third place he has removed
the blasphemer, hated alike by those with millions
in gold and alcohol buried away, and
those with teetotal tendencies and no money
but their legal salaries.

May 26:—Everyone has forgotten the flying
machine feud. An Anti-Singapore panic
is on. St. Friend has started a series of weekday
sermons against Singapore in the Cathedral
and Rabbi Ezekiel is doing the same in
his Temple and they are moving all secular
forums to co-operate. And
The Boone Ax

162
whacks and chops at the issue for no one
hates a Singaporian better than Black Hawk
Boone, the roaring cinnamon bear. It is hard
to make out any justification of a war at this
exact hour.

When, in his youth, St. Friend made the Pilgrimage
of St. Scribe he heard certain strange
political talk near the dazzling temple of the
cocaine Buddha of Singapore. Three half-English
Eurasians were deep in future world
politics. This conversation temporarily
spoiled his meditations on the real and beautiful
Prince Gautama, which otherwise continued
throughout the whole of Asia. Ever
since that day, St. Friend has been giving his
attention to the Japanese and Chinese denunciations
of the Singaporians, especially
since those denunciations have been so stoutly
re-echoed by Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the
Second, the greatest American representative
in the legislature of the World Government.
That tremendous hall has rung with the hammer-blows
of Michael, the Blacksmith, against
international treason, the arrogant Singaporian
cry of “States Rights.”

St. Friend and the Rabbi and Boone, backed
by the Board of Education, proclaim that
they have been studying the wily local policy
of the man from Singapore. It seems to be

163
first, to promote confusion. St. Friend declares
that the stranger has incited “by peculiar
and devious means” all the recklessness
of the children of the city and that “the defiance
of Beau Nash was a test case” and that
“the man from Singapore hoped, if the Beau
survived, to build a green glass temple here.”
The man from Singapore is really a public
benefit judged by the mere surface of things,
since he is the scapegoat for all our recent
fights and fevers. But no man touches him.
He goes on teaching in the University, unmolested.
His classes in the Malay Peninsula
languages and literature are well attended by
the sons and daughters of those who denounce
him. Many wait for any slip of the tongue or
wrong turn of the voice and cannot catch him.

They cannot help liking the jolly old Malay
lore about things which have nothing to do
with politics and which are the whole theme
of the brown professor’s discourses.

May 27:—Boone and his faction have
slacked up on the Singaporian scent and are
back on the old argument. Boone declares
that the University must be put more firmly
in the position of censor of the administration,
and after all there are, by actual count, a
larger group of those, supposed to have buried
gold and buried alcohol, still using flying machines

164
than the list of our “common people.”
The Snobs have merely put on the Robin
Redbreast uniform. And he boldly prints the
list of those morally certain to have much
buried alcohol and gold but puts it so deftly
there is no risk of suit. And so, to make good,
the City Hall starts an informal flying festival
this afternoon and crowds anyone who can
fly at all into machines that come pouring
down from Chicago in response to orders
from our City Hall. But they are all Robin
Redbreast machines.

May 28:—The Mayor is winning. Simply
by giving everyone a ride who can possibly
be persuaded to ride, he has outnumbered
in one day, by actual count of temporary
flyers, the active Boone constituency,
and what is called: “The Moral Issue” has
completely disappeared. But Boone turns
today to a personal issue. He gives all possible
attention through coffee-house henchmen,
and openly, in
The Boone Ax
, to the discrediting
of “Crawling Jim.” And true or
false, the stories are whispered around the
town about Jim that will spoil him as a political
asset and ruin his glory as the punisher
of “Beau Nash.”

He has been guilty of certain cruelties to
animals and children. It is whispered that the

165
police have clearly established it. They are
keeping the records. They are hoping they
may some day have the freedom to act. And
so Boone gets Jim “where he lives,” for
rumor hurts Jim to the soul. Since he is himself
a peddler of little scandals, it is his world.
He is said to be a carrier of everything in the
way of poisoned small-talk to that strange
beauty, Mara, the daughter of Singapore.
When the small talk turns against him, as he
gathers it, he droops and mopes indeed for
an hour or two.

But he is still president of the Robin Redbreast
Club and he takes his consolation this
afternoon by extraordinary evolutions in the
air, near where he killed Beau Nash. He goes
through as many curves as a pigeon bred
for flying tricks. And it is said on the street
that the Robin Redbreast Club will keep him
in office out of respect for his luck. He has
always been a reckless but endlessly successful
trick flyer. So by midnight Jim has won
the cheap rumor battle in the coffee houses
and Yellow Dance Halls and drug stores.
And why not? Boone should be in better
business.

May 29:—The town wakes up this morning
to find the Snobs asserting themselves
again, though now it is the parents and grandparents

166
that are more at fault, not the high
school aviators. The families on the list Boone
has published, along with their sympathizers,
have in the night put gold-foil on conspicuous
portions of the cupolas of their cottage roofs
or the roofs of their club houses.

May 30:—There is a scandal in the Microscope
and Telescope Factory. Old Montague
Rock is one of the chief men of the factory.
Patricia Anthony, the Proud, is leading
a strike against him because of a certain contract,
which he long ago secured, for lenses
which have been delivered for over a year in
a steady stream to a firm on the western
coast. It now transpires that these people
were agents for the Singaporian Government
and Patricia Anthony is morally certain,
Singapore is using these lenses in the new
mysterious war machine which is a step beyond
the lens gun. The Singaporians are
presumed to be laying up these machines
already, for the day of Singaporian rebellion
against the World Government.

Old Montague Rock has always had an irritating
style of address and he has made a
speech to the strikers in a fashion that has
not helped toward peace one little bit. He has
said this very morning that the Singaporians

167
are the souls of honor and most admirable,
aside from their religion, with which, of
course, he has nothing to do. And that they
are the height of Asiatic aristocracy at all
times. He has said our city should be flattered
to furnish them with lenses for guns for local
police work in Asia. And so he continues to
paraphrase his speech in conversations with
reporters at Fifth and Monroe and in Coe’s
Book Store, and wherever he meets his
friends and enemies, through the whole afternoon.

So
The Boone Ax
advocates a strikers’ parade
for tomorrow afternoon and Boone
strains his whole credit and prestige in the
city to make it a success. Those societies, etc.
that are to be the principal decorative features
are listed, in this afternoon’s papers, and the
line of march is printed. They are to assemble
on Second and Monroe, near the old arsenal,
and march south on Second to Capital
Avenue, east on Capital Avenue to Fifth,
north on Fifth to Monroe, east on Monroe to
Sixth, etc.

May 31:—The Anti King Coal Parade goes
by this afternoon with many surprises, not
in the official list of splendors. The event was
scheduled to be called: “The Parade of the

168
Striking Lens Factory” but Montague Rock
being often called King Coal, the other title
gets into the headlines.

First, between girls on horseback, carrying
the Star Spangled Banner and the International
flag, rides Patricia Anthony, forewoman
of the lens factory, and, after her,
march or ride the strikers, in all possible glittering
and glassy spangles, to show their
trade and their gaiety. And then comes King
Coal in chains. He is presumed to be an excellent
portrait of the head of the Rock
family. He is built of actual coal, in parts,
and black pasteboard also. Elegant minions
of King Coal are impersonated by masked
people, in caricatures of the fastidious Singaporian
costume, and they wear light chains
that, nevertheless, hold them in leash to the
great image.

Everyone jeers with emphasis when King
Coal goes by, and many people on the street
sing and shout:—“The Song for All Strikers”
composed by Portia, the Singing Aviator,
for this especial parade.

There is an interminable miscellany of
floats, reiterating with less and less force,
the general theme of the occasion, and I am
about tired out. Then Avanel comes by at the
head of her Amazons and Michaelites, all riding

169
milk white ponies. It is the first time I
have seen Avanel in command, and Boone did
not mention this cavalcade in his paper.
Indeed, it is remarked upon as a most
arbitrary use of military forces that are
accepted by the International Government.
Avanel is every inch the commander and,
for all she is so slender and young, looks
the immortal, Athena, leading forth her
city. There must be something, not rumored
in the coffee houses, or this demonstration
in force would not be permitted this mile
of riders. Their faces are not masked as were
those of the ancient Ku Klux Klan but the
costume is, indeed, as singular. It is, for both
the men and the women, in the pattern of the
old hunter and trapper outfit of coonskin cap
and fringed shirt, jacket, leggins and moccasins.
But it is all white leather, with
touches of long white fur. The girl’s costumes
are cut a bit like the conventional riding
habit. The dazzling whiteness would not
have been possible before the days of smoke
consumers and dustless streets. I behold an
avalanche of thundering snow.

It is late in the evening, and I am helping
the tired Avanel dismount from her pony.
Then, we sit together by her unlit fireplace.
She has put the hunting knife and the sword

170
back on the mantle and they seem but family
relics, and the parade seems but a tale she has
told me, and her horse but a thought that she
rode today. I walk home through the midnight,
under newly blossoming trees. The
rich and heavy perfume of the Apple-Amaranth
flowers, that are looming delicately
against the moon, sweeps around me. It is
as though every cluster were a censer from
heaven, devised by a lazy and luxurious
angel.

171

CHAPTER XI

MATTERS TOUCHING ST. FRIEND, THE GIVER OF BREAD, AND HIS ORDER OF THE STRICT OBSERVANCE AND HIS ORDER OF THE LIBERAL OBSERVANCE.

June 1, 2018:—In the capital of Illinois, in
this year of grace, St. Friend is a healer of
the body and soul. He is more of a philosopher
than the fuming Black Hawk Boone,
that is, he has a cooler disposition. Yet Boone
heals by hard maxims, given with that lovely
fruit, the Amaranth-Apple. St. Friend heals
by sermons and prayers and the pictured
parables, the rituals envisaged and illuminated
in the celebration of the Office of the
Blessed Bread.

The real name of our saint, which no one
ever hears, is Hugh Adams Matheney. He is,
away and beyond, the oldest of the Board of
Education or of any of the leaders of the city.
He has little fire in his blood, but has still the
greatest reserve battery of nervous force. He
was, even as a little boy, a protege and
disciple of St. Scribe of the Shrines, who was
then in the height of his glory as a leader of

172
our town. He preceded St. Friend as the dominating
figure of the Cathedral of St. Peter and
St. Paul and handed down to him and to the
whole city the old doctrine, with a new emphasis,
that the whole human race is the mystical
body of Christ, soon to be raised from
the dead. On his mother’s side St. Friend is a
descendant of a long line of members of the
Church of the Disciples. On his father’s side
his ancestors are notable in several lines,
for instance, the Matheneys of Springfield.
The original Matheneys put up one of the
first three settlers’ log cabins ever erected in
this county. The Adams strain is from New
Harmony, Indiana. There they were bakers
for several generations. The cottage of St.
Friend has his baker’s coat of arms painted
over the little front door, over the tremendous
open fireplace, and in the little dining room.
On one slender pole, in front of his cottage,
all of his family flags are flying. The most important
of the flags, in the estimation of St.
Friend, is that of the clan of these same
Adams people from New Harmony.

St. Friend is the last of his actual clan to be
a baker, though the town is full of his first
and second cousins;—and third cousins, indeed,
that claim him proudly. He has adopted
a son, an orphan boy, early apprenticed to

173
his flour barrels by the school authorities, a
boy of Thibetan ancestry and one of a small
local group of Thibetans. He is now grown.
Except for ceremonial occasions he has long
graduated from baking. He is occupied in
designing more exquisite and slender sunset
towers, of the school of Louis H. Sullivan and
Frank Lloyd Wright, to add one more circle
to the outer ring, when purple cottages and
old buildings have been sufficiently cleared
away. He is known as the “young St. Friend”
or the “Thibetan boy.”

When I have passed him on the street, I have
observed him muttering to himself or occasionally
walking and arguing with the other
Thibetans. He looks every inch the stranger,
with square face and almond eyes, and skin
brickdust red, with heavy bronze beneath it.

The sister of St. Friend, living in the same
cottage, a mild, ghostly creature, creeping
about, is more than a centenarian. She remembers
the celebration of Armistice Day,
November 11, 1918. She was then a baby in
her father’s arms, and held out her hands to
catch the falling showers of confetti thrown
from the high buildings. She thought it was
snow.

St. Friend graduated from the Hay-Edwards
school. He went through one of Springfield’s

174
High Schools. He continued on for
a while through the Municipal University of
the town. He attended a college of his faith
at Washington, D. C. He then became a novice
of the order of St. Scribe of the Shrines and
took that discipline as literally as possible.

St. Friend is a close correspondent of the
hundred radical bishops who are, often in
remoter fashion, followers of St. Scribe of
the Shrines, while at the same time they are
conserving the results of the Church Revolution.
Two of these bishops, the present leaders
of the order, were young pilgrims with
him when he made the journey commanded
by St. Scribe, the pilgrimage around the
world to the one hundred shrines of the one
hundred religions, beginning with the Tomb
of Lincoln. The boy returned while St. Scribe
was still in his prime and a rousing, dominating
figure in the city. The boy became the
private secretary of the Saint. When the
saint was an old man, the disciple was his confidential
adviser and finally, when the great
man departed this life, the office of leading
the Cathedral flock naturally devolved upon
the disciple. It was about this time that the
rumor began to move among the people that
the departed St. Scribe was once Hunter
Kelly and it slowly became the fashion, with

175
some of the more fanciful citizens, to speak of
Hunter Kelly-St. Scribe as though they were
one guardian spirit. St. Friend was offered
the headship of the order of St. Scribe but he
refused it and, without abandoning his place
and the prescribed forms and prayers of this
discipline, he set up quite a separate order of
his own, the Order of the Blessed Bread of the
Strict Observance, and today he has proclaimed
from the Cathedral pulpit the setting
up of a more popular order, of the more
liberal observance, and though there is much
not yet cleared up by the sermon, Avanel is
resolved to join, if possible, and recruit me, if
it may be done.

This is the history of The Order of The
Strict Observance:—For many years St.
Friend has given himself, in true devotion, as
a member of the Springfield Associated Charities,
to provide for the handful of defectives,
drug fiends, and those outlaws who are now
classed with them by common consent:—the
unskilled laborers. St. Friend finds in his
heart a great Franciscan pity for them. He
finds there a sharp social rebellion that there
should be any outlaws or helpless ones whatever.
So he has become, by acclamation, the
perpetual head of the Associated Charities,
and these feverish wanton ones have been

176
cheerfully left to his over-solicitude. The
entire contingent of the socially crippled cuts
as small a figure on the general horizon of the
city as did the group of the professional paupers
in the days when blind men turned hand
organs. The educational machinery is such
that within the double city walls, built long
ago by Ralph Adams Cram, the so-called “exploited”
have long been kept out. People in
general are well-fed, super-skilled laborers.
And they have about all the carnal bread and
all the carnal circuses they can well digest.

But St. Friend, who in his youth wept for
every fallen sparrow till he could weep no
more, has long maintained his Order of the
Blessed Bread of the Strict Observance for
those left behind in the race, generally degenerate
sons and daughters of old settlers. The
order is properly called the “Brotherhood of
the Blessed Bread.” Those who join eat of a
bread baked from a special Sangamon County
wheat, planted between the inner and the
outer wall by some of the various sects of the
Flower Religion and the Park Religion. St.
Friend cares not what sect plants the wheat,
so it be planted by those who believe in democracy
and prayer.

After due vigil, the bread is skilfully baked
by the Thibetan boy, or other chosen members

177
of the society. Those who eat of it are exhorted,
but not commanded, to take the oath
before John Boat, for the bread, till now, has
been primarily intended for the Brotherhood
of the Strict Observance.

This oath before John Boat or other cooperating
justice of the peace is printed in
the little book of devotion that goes with the
Strict Observance. The book and oath are intended
for the most hopeless derelicts only.
Presumably the bread is eaten for the first
time by these, after the oath is administered.

The gray-headed old justice of the peace
furnished the idea himself, when he and St.
Friend were young men, and St. Friend kept
the copy of the oath and brooded upon it long
before he felt it politic to found the order.
John Boat had observed, in his experience as
a notary, that men, who seem but animated
putrescence, still regard their sworn word in
court. It is the last chance to put iron into
them. This thought in mind, the oath is administered
with the solemnity that went into
the old monastic vows. From the many who
have been given life by the oath, St. Friend
has taken great assurance that he is on the
road to a tremendous social amelioration.

June 2:—Because Avanel and I have decided
to join the more liberal observance of

178
the Order of the Blessed Bread, though we,
as yet, know little about it, she is eager to
show to me the occasion of the administering
of the oath of the Strict Observance. This
Monday morning we are taking the back
bench in the shadowy corner of the justice
court to watch the older ceremonial. Now
most oaths in court are rattled off like parrot
words, but to John Boat this is an occasion
when he is a priest after the order of Melchizedek.
He gives a seeming dignity to the
most carping and exacting demand of the
pledge, reading it line upon line. Blue-faced
Surto Hurdenburg, the derelict, echoes him
with full and honest intent, repeating every
line after the learned court with great respect
and devotion.

This is the text of the pledge:—

State of Illinois

City of Springfield,

June 2, 2018.

I, Surto Hurdenburg, accepting the lordship
of Christ, do solemnly swear, by the everliving
God, that from this time henceforth
I will support the Constitution of the World
Government, the Constitution of the United
States, the Laws of Illinois, the Ordinances

179
of Springfield, that I will faithfully observe
and keep inviolate the moral laws of the community;
that I will carefully and faithfully
observe my duty to my neighbor, recognizing
his rights at all times; that I will endeavor to
become an expert workman and member of a
guild; that I will faithfully, honestly and conscientiously
exercise my rights of franchise
as a member of my guild and a citizen of the
community, with a firm determination to
bring about the best results for clean and
honest government, and that I will devote as
much strength as possible to the study of
civic reform, examining at all times the opinions
of clean-minded radical citizens and acting
on them according to the dictates of my
conscience. I specifically promise to abstain
from motion-picture shows, yellow dance
halls, bad women, alcoholic liquors and narcotics,
and to denounce and work against in
every way possible the traffic in Singaporian
cocaine.

Further and finally, I promise to eat the
Blessed Bread of this Order of the Strict Observance,
according to the manner and at the
times laid down in the Book of Devotion, and
to follow the discipline for body and soul
there prescribed and imposed for the good of

180
the order and the health and well-being of
my city.

(Signed) Surto Hurdenburg.

Subscribed and sworn to before me this
Second Day of June, 2018.

(Seal) John Boat

Notary Public.

I conclude that, in the light of Springfield
life as I have seen it these strange days, it will
be easier for such as Surto Hurdenburg to
keep the more literal specifications of the
pledge, such as the ban on motion pictures,
than to enter into the deep mazes of citizenship
with judgment. He will keep close to
St. Friend and the order, who hate the films,
and thereby be able to let the films alone.
Most photoplays outside of the educational
buildings or beyond the immediate jurisdiction
of the World’s Fair authorities are shown
on the right or left of the sauntering corridors
opening on the Yellow Dance Halls on the
same floors. Here half-hour lengths of film are
run through, when the crowd sweeps in to
rest. The merits of the exceedingly artistic
studio and theatre, called “The Egyptian
Photoplay Association,” headed by Gwendolyn
Charles and Rabbi Terence Ezekiel remain
unappreciated by St. Friend and the
members of the Order of the Strict Observance.

181
This in spite of the fact that the Photoplay
Association in question now has in
charge most of those exquisite and unimpeachable
film theatres of the University
World’s Fair and several other worth-while
film-theatre circuits in Central Illinois. “The
Egyptian Photoplay Association” will rent
slightly worn films to Yellow Dance Halls,
after first runs in these others, and thereby
make the films in the eyes of the Order of the
Strict Observance, mere devil’s nets for fish.

So, though the highly esteemed Rabbi Terence
Ezekiel tries to act as mediator, there is
eternal war between the fiery Gwendolyn
Charles and this saint.

For a long time back truly aesthetic and
truly educational motion pictures have been
shown in the school and University class
rooms. Many of them are scientific and historical
records and renderings. In the odd
hours of loafing through these three months
I have noted many of them as of the best
gifts of the new time. But our stubborn
St. Friend, as a member of the school board,
generally votes against them, and in solitary
grandeur. While at one with the general policies
of the educational system, he makes many
a speech before the members for the restoration
of the regime of the book and the blackboard.
He truly says that these are now almost

182
abolished in the presence of the protean
triumphant films, of the street pageantry, the
training of skilled labor in the high schools,
of the oral, the phonographic, telegraphic and
telephone methods, applied to all forms of
teaching. And only last week he met what
appeared to be his Waterloo when it was
voted to extend and enlarge the entirely respectable,
if a little frigid, university dance
halls and to include motion picture loafing
rooms, the better to run competition with the
Yellow Halls.

Some of these things I go over with Avanel,
as we walk home from witnessing Surto Hurdenburg’s
oath, and we wonder just what of
the forbidden things, besides motion pictures,
St. Friend will include in his pledge for the
Liberal Observance. Avanel says: “I admit
that the men who are sworn in, like this Surto
Hurdenburg, are apt to become useful, if fanatical,
citizens. Their poor strength must be
economized in narrow channels if it is to
last and be recuperated. But if St. Friend
tries to put such a set of chains on me I will
not speak to him for a month.”

Saturday, June 7:—St. Friend has today
given it out by word of mouth and by editorials
in the five papers that the whole world
is welcome to his bread. The Order of the

183
Liberal Observance is already more popularly
called by the alternate descriptive title: “The
Citizens in the Communion of the Blessed
Bread.” There is no oath; even a Quaker may
join.

Sunday, June 8:—It is the warmest morning
of the year, so far, in an exceedingly backward
summer. It is the first real June
weather, and all the people rejoice in it.
Avanel walks to church in the most wonderful
of white airy dresses. And in these vacuum-cleaned
streets, with no soot and no coal dust
and no factory grime, people, working or
playing, can be dressed all day as for a party
if they choose.

All day yesterday couriers of all faiths,
representing St. Friend’s personal rather than
his religious companions, have been out inviting
the people. At least one member of each
family has been asked to bring his tribe to
the Cathedral green and to listen and carry
the message back with the bread.

Avanel and I are early for Church and so
we make a circuit, enjoying the airy splendors
of the crowd. And we go around by St.
John’s Hospital, so lately rebuilt by the insistence
of Mayo Sims, to vindicate his scientific
zeal, and they say it is a splendid scientific
monument to any man. It is east of the

184
Cathedral of St. Peter and St. Paul, as it has
been for over four generations. And the heretic
synagogue and the school for teaching
Hebrew, conducted by Rabbi Terence Ezekiel,
are on the sites where the two orthodox synagogues
were, one hundred years ago.

The green in front of the Cathedral was
enclosed by a beautiful Gothic wall long ago,
at the same time the devout congregation
rebuilt the church. The enclosure is rapidly
filling with people. St. Friend is to speak to
the whole city from the Cathedral steps.

Piled on great wooden trays on the side of
the Cathedral steps are the splendid brown
loaves, put there for all the world by the
Brotherhood of the Strict Observance, who
are about in their almost monkish official
robes, proud indeed to be so prominent.

Blue-faced Surto Hurdenburg, so lately
sworn in, is an ex-headwaiter of alleged New
York hotel training and he is now to prove
his mettle. He is about his task decorously
and swiftly enough, for those seated and settled
already have the tissue-wrapped loaves
in their laps, and all through the sermon, as
fast as our citizens are settled, they are given
their loaves without a sound or a grimace, and
Hurdenburg, the efficient, rises high at once in
the estimation of the children of light.

185
But now the saint rises to speak. He is
indeed a figure; his white hair gleams in the
June morning air. His face is the face of Lincoln,
grown old, with a touch of St. Francis
eternally young. He straightens to his full
height. He is fifty years younger. He is one
of those capable of seeming collapse for
weeks, when it is but the storage time, and
then the lightning is discharged in one tremendous
hour.

There is a certain vast medieval humor
about him. He is vested in his ceremonial baking
apron and Avanel giggles till he actually
begins to speak. This is the end of his
sermon:—

“Pray consider that, in your freedom from
vows this splendid June day, you are nevertheless
dubbed knights, my fellow citizens. In
medieval times monks and knights served the
Church with the same divine vocation and
devotion.

“The Church of Springfield has come. It
is the sunlit grass of this park; it is this Illinois
sky. Under the roof of this Cathedral
behind me and of all the churches, temples,
and synagogues of this town, its primer work
has been done and will be done. It will begin
with sheltered faiths and will not contradict
or undermine any.

186
“It seems that we must periodically sing
hymns and look at the little jeweled holy
things and read the precious little books, or
we cannot go on and out and up. There was
only one Johnny Appleseed in the history of
mankind. His image is in our Cathedral, but
even he read Swedenborg and clung to that
system. Yet sooner or later, like that great
saint Johnny Appleseed, we awaken to our
great outdoors, and all the visions there.

“All Holy worship, learned, as when Johnny
Appleseed walked the highroad, or the
primer lesson when he first read Swedenborg
beneath his boyhood roof, makes over the
mere bread of comradeship into this blessed
bread which will heal our shameful diseases
of body and of soul.

“Share it, share it! When we have shared
the blessed bread, communing like true
friends, the beauty of all Heaven, the sea in
which we move that is above all and through
all and in all, will gild more perfectly the
Springfield daily grind and the Springfield
sabbath. The devout convert and his child
and his grandchild will build his house as
beautifully as our Sacred Apple Tree is made,
as righteously as the Sacred Oak Tree, as
democratically as the Golden Rain Tree,
which spreads its branches like a gate for

187
all of us to pass through in equality. The devout
convert will build such architecture as
glitters in the songs and books of devotion of
St. Scribe.

“The voices of the children will be as noble
as the discourses of the prairie winds that
catch our tree boughs at sunset. Every house
will be as delicate and subtle as the ferny
hollows of the Sangamon. The convert will
name many birds that will come at his call
and he will feed them crumbs of this Blessed
Bread in friendship.

“When Springfield has partaken of this
manna for a generation, all things will become
new. Leavening thoughts will come
from all the street corners. Novel fancies will
come from the coffee houses. The conferences
and colloquies of fallible men will take on
something of the aspect of the meetings of
the inspired souls of Heaven.

“We walk our plain path! We eat our plain
bread in a rare fellowship! Therefore all
things become eternal. The Church of Springfield,
the church of this sunlit grass, the
church of a million days and nights, is proclaimed
from the steps of this Cathedral of
St. Peter and St. Paul this day.”

And now Avanel comments:—“If you look
deeply into the aphorisms my father serves

188
with his apples and with his paper money
theory, you will find, though he is no atheist
or mocker, he is a son of the narrow, dry antagonisms
of some of the village atheist stock
with which our blood mingled during our sojourn
in Egypt. I glory in my Indian ancestry,
even if I do not make myself conspicuous
with my hair loose and my left hand crimson.
But as to my father’s village-infidel streak,
I have no use for it. Moreover, I heard him
ding dong his doctrines in my childhood at
times when he was not at his best. I know
better how to take St. Friend. Both are narrow
as mousetraps on their literal side, if one
has a turn for being caught.

“I think I choose St. Friend for my guide,
because he begins and ends with prayer. I do
not stay away from motion pictures, as he
commands, nor from the Yellow Dance Halls,
as he and my father both command. But I
distrust these places, because of the warnings
of these good men. I will eat this bread, you
and I will eat it together, though I know it is
railed at in the Yellow Dance Halls, and I
know the keen things that are said there
against such superstitions. We will continue
to eat together the Amaranth-Apples that are
tabooed there. We will read together the proverbs
and songs and prayers of St. Scribe and,

189
while our feet may be in the Yellow Halls,
our souls will be making the pilgrimage of
the one hundred religions. We will be thinking
together how the whole human race is the
body of Christ, soon to be raised from the
dead.”

And so this evening Avanel invites me to
her own select table in the inn at the top of
one of the great northwest gates, the inner
gate, that overlooks the former village of
Ashland, Cass County, and is one of the
chief glories of the Inner Wall. It is
the Musicians’ Building and from here
oftener than anywhere else on this wall,
sound the special evening hymns and organ
solos and chimes, over this whole segment of
the city and over the forest parks to the north,
between the walls. Pilgrims pass through the
gate beneath us. They have visited, according
to the ritual, Lincoln’s monument, the
First Shrine of St. Scribe—Hunter Kelly, and
they are hurrying along his great highway
leading northwest through the Gate of the
Outer Wall, that overlooks the former village
of Virginia in old Cass County.

Our refractory is called:—The Pilgrim’s
First Inn. It is on the cafeteria principle but
is a most spacious place, being the whole floor
of the tower, with tremendous sheets of glass

190
for windows, so that an aviator, circling it,
can see straight through it from every angle,
and all the colored and decorative searchlights
of this happy June evening sweep
through it as the twilight comes on, lights for
the most part of the delicate tints of the
towers:—more like rapid clouds, left over
from the sunset, than sharp, searching,
swords.

So Avanel and I find our table, in proper
chatting distance from several others, some
of whom have also brought their brown
loaf. And we carry from the counter a few
things like coffee and butter and Amaranth-Apples
and we banquet. She speaks more
lovingly of her father’s many moods. She
divides the apples, uttering at the same time
scraps of his philosophy.

At last we take the bread of St. Friend. It
is our communion service, High Mass of comradeship.

Avanel quotes from the Gospel of Luke,—from
Luke’s deathless story of the first communion.

There is a ringing of bells all over the city,
silvery and sweet, and in every tower of the
walls:—the ringing of the star chimes. It is
a clear night. The sweeping colored lights

191
are gone. We go to the great expanse of windows
and look up.

Avanel says:—“The trouble with this
breaking of bread is that it is a pledge to
break our bodies. I do not want to break
mine for a long time, if ever.”

“Yet,” I say, “You ride your pale war
horse.” Avanel, the dancer, replies:—“Let
us hope that the war will never come. Let us
hope, before the time war is due, the body of
Christ, the whole human race, will be raised
from the dead.”

192

CHAPTER XII

HOW THROUGH SERMONS BY ST. FRIEND AND BY POLITICAL ACTIVITY, SUCH AS THAT OF SURTO HURDENBURG, THE YELLOW DANCE HALLS ARE VOTED OUT FOR GOOD.

June 9, 2018:—I have given up art teaching
in a separate studio of my own and have
been, for some time, merely writing verses
and loafing about and peering into the town,
often with old Sparrow Short. This comes
about because I have sent my few pupils over
to him. He is a most likable fellow. He puts
on no airs whatever. We find we have a great
ocean of common opinions and identical prejudices
in the field of art and an equal love
of feeding crumbs to the English sparrows
and other such birds and we keep off ground
where we would be hostile in argument. I
think I did the town a good turn when I persuaded
such people as showed symptoms of
studying with me, to study with him. In return
he urges me to give criticisms in his life
classes when I feel the urge to impart to
youth, or when he is out loafing, or helping

193
decorate some of the newly revamped yellow
halls, particularly the Hall of Velaska. The
latest occasion when I took over his place
came about because he was locked up for days
without anyone to go his bail all for alleged
treason to the World Government. At
last Boone lets him out, by going bond, with
a roaring lecture, which is replied to in kind,
they say, with no show of gratitude whatever.
But the privilege of being out on bond is precarious
and liable to be withdrawn to one
waiting trial for World Treason and Short
keeps me in sight for emergencies. Sparrow
Short is, of course, passionately loyal to the
Star Spangled Banner and Washington’s
Farewell Address but that is considered only
one half of patriotism and called “World-Anarchy”
now. Most of the people who study
under him do not care what his views may be
on any subject but art. He is the best teacher
and that is enough for them. And, as a matter
of fact, in expressing his international
views which he does out of teaching hours,
he is a roaring baby and unworthy of the attention
of grown up politicians. But I tell
him that even grown ups in politics should
not be too much censured for misunderstanding
him. People, like Short, who fight for

194
individuality and whose whole object as
teachers is to promote the diversity of their
pupils, cannot see why the world cannot be
one great art class. They are, indeed, in
strong contrast with state builders, who build
with men in masses and blocks.

This morning Short takes me around to the
Hall of Velaska, when it is absolutely deserted
except by ourselves, and shows me with pride
the pictures he has given the hall. These pictures
are so set in the walls, they seem painted
there, and the whole color scheme that Short
has long planned holds them together. There
is a defiant touch of Singaporian green in it,
sometimes with the glisten of the hated green
glass, but the place is otherwise in the most
quiet and inoffensive taste.

The first picture is the one that he had long
planned for the World’s Fair, till it was debarred
on account of its subject:—the portrait
of
Mara of Singapore
, when she was the
age of Juliet. Next is what Short calls a Fairy
Fashion-plate, a gown to be worn at the funeral
of an exceedingly wealthy bumblebee.
If we are to believe our guide, Mr. Short, here
is depicted an occasion when one must wear a
look of grief and resignation and an appropriate
costume. Short explains that all bootlicking

195
fairies consider it good form to blacken
the face on such occasions. They will not
blacken their faces for bumblebees who are
poor. But, when a deal of honey is left to sustain
the mourners, it has become a convenient
manner of expressing grief for the honeyeater
to steal an ink bottle off a writing table
and spill the ink all over one’s self. One looks
more crestfallen than in any conventional
black. So this fairy manikin is dressed in
gray dove’s feathers and ink poured on her
in streaks and her little face is all smudged
with it. Soon she will hurry home, take a complete
bath, and eat the honey.

The Boy and the Ostrichissimus:—The Ostrichissimus
is a bird about three times the
size of the ostrich and with ostrich plumes
all over it, and some of them so long behind,
it has not the insulting shape of the ostrich.
A more graceful neck helps also. Its head is
not so bald. The Ostrichissimus is driven with
a silk cord, passed through the mouth, for a
bridle. The boy driving holds on tight with
both knees and is a little scared but enjoying
himself immensely. They are hurrying across
the Sahara desert.

The Devil is Making Candy:—Short explains
that this is a picture with a purpose.

196
The Devil, in a cook’s costume, is bending
over the usual candy kettle. Peeping in at
the door are those that wait for his candy.
These are the usual run of sinners, types that
appear in sermon pictures, the miser with his
gold and the Magdalene with her painted
jaws, etc. The devil looks exceedingly sly but
Short explains that there is nothing for him
to look sly about. It is only fudge. The Devil
tests it by dipping in his finger, which, of
course, he can do without burning himself.
“Yet,” says Short, “I would not eat after
the Devil’s fingers. Would you?”

The Sewing Machine of Fate:—Fate is an
old woman among the stars, big as a sign of
the zodiac. She is crouched in a heap over a
sewing machine. It is a little too small for
her clumsy hands but she can use it. Forever
and forever, with eyes that never lift from
the plunging needle, she bends over her task,
sending through new cloth from the looms of
time. When this cloth has passed under the
needle, it is written with characters that can
never be snipped out. This inscription is all
she lives for. Yet, like the inscriptions of the
temples of Yucatan, it is forever unreadable
except to ghosts, hobgoblins, spooks, and
such like creatures, with whom sensible
people have nothing to do.

197
There is one great blank space on the wall,
for the portrait of the mythical queen of the
revels in this particular Yellow Hall, Sally
Mary Ann Velaska Harris, familiarly called
“Velaska.”

Sunday, June 15:—I find myself this morning
in the loft of the gigantic Cathedral of
St. Peter and St. Paul with Surto Hurdenburg.
His face is still painted blue by mother
nature, as a reminder of his long struggles
with alcohol. But there are new unquenchable
fires within. He looks like a broken down
but repentant Bill Sykes. He takes the sermon
with great literalness, as I know, by his
asides to me.

St. Friend’s voice is much more quavering
and old than last Sunday. He is living in the
reaction from that tremendous physical outlay.
It is as though we were endowed with a
special sense of hearing and were listening
from celestial parapets to the cry of a sick
man on the earth.

Such is the magnificence and medievalism
of the old church, so brilliant are its windows,
so austere its pillars and niches for the saints,
and the images of those saints, that it seems
to have been built a thousand instead of a
hundred years ago. Yet here are not only
images of St. Peter and St. Paul, but of a

198
long line of saints, as beautiful as America
itself all the way to yesterday. Here are
Saint Francis and Swedenborg, and Johnny
Appleseed before whom candles are burning:—Hunter
Kelly, in his aspect of St. Scribe
of the Shrines, and Ralph Waldo Emerson
and Mary Baker Eddy, and the first Mother
Grey, founder of the flower religion and
Jane Addams and that tremendous and divine
jester and poet and sage, Abraham Lincoln.
There are a hundred other niches with
the American saints and world saints and a
hundred others waiting for the saints of tomorrow.

But Surto Hurdenburg is listening to the
sermon. Here is a fragment thereof:—

“The solution of the problem of the social
evil can be given in four words: ‘THE
PROUD CITIZEN WOMAN.’

“Springfield has no tenements but until the
life of the United States outside of Springfield
has its larger hours of leisure and
more green clear spaces in which to cultivate
codes and fine observances between boy and
girl, the custom of selling the young girls to
the slaughter will leap over double Gothic
walls and invade those groves and parks we
call ‘Springfield.’ We have the beginning

199
of chivalry in many ways, such as the public
school honor pageants and athletic honor
tournaments and all the fine codes of Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the First, in connection
therewith. We still need more sense of honor,
honor beyond the point of Bayard and the
Cid.

“There is only one issue for sweethearts:—honor
or dishonor, citizen or slave. So it has
been from the beginning of time, so it will
continue till woman’s redemption and complete
emancipation. The fantastic Hindu
would die ten thousand deaths before he
would break caste.

“The stubborn Mohammedan or Jew will
yet be torn to shreds before he will consent to
offer to an idol. Not all the tides of the world
cynicism has changed these. The Japanese
would cut out his tongue before he would
speak a slighting word against the flag or
honor of Japan or do a work in her despite.
Are these people to be mocked for having a
code?

“By standing by those Don Quixotic notions
they prove they are men, not cattle. America,
led by such orchard cities as Springfield and
the other capitals that are turning their streets
into parks of worship, should have one patriotism,

200
one caste rule, one religion, the religion
of honoring woman as a comrade citizen.

“The Yellow Dance Halls are deceits. They
dance lies. Their unwritten laws are poisonous
Singaporian devices that in the end make
beasts of boys and girls and take cocaine
for granted. And in the sporting, boastful
excitement of cocaine, ill things are born,
vendettas that only yesterday brought mortal
bloodshed upon our streets and tricks that
shamed us before the ages.

“The election is coming Tuesday, the Yellow
Dance Hall Parade, tomorrow. Let us
remember that this referendum election has
been brought about by the signatures of the
entire Board of Education, of over half the
City Council and of a completely representative
host of citizens of all families and clans
and faiths. If we who have signed that paper
win our petition, it is the last and third call
and the voters will grant that The Yellow
Dance Halls be banished from our city forever.
Tomorrow the Yellow Parade is coming.
There will be every effort on the part
of the yellow claque to laugh down the seriousness
of the issue. Let no friend of this
Cathedral take part in that parade. Let all

201
good citizens, at every spare moment from
this hour to the election, go forth to urge
their immediate kith and kin and fellow clansmen
to turn out at the polls and vote for the
banishment of these places and let my friends
who have taken the especial Oath of the Strict
Observance consider this election their charge
and let them leave nothing undone that will
secure a full showing at the polls of the voters
of whatever persuasion. The only way to lose
this election is by staying at home.”

The voice of the aged and weary St. Friend
rises almost to a shriek. He pauses many
times for breath but goes on, clinging to the
pulpit as he may, exhausted by vigil and
anger:—

“The Yellow Halls, where all public gambling
is carried on and all election money
passes! The Yellow Halls, where, despite the
legislation of a clearly established majority,
through a hundred years, the gold and alcohol
from far beneath the gilded roofs, is brought
forth from mouldy hiding places and doled
out to corrupt the electorate and thwart the
clearly recorded will of the people. How long
shall we endure these secret multimillionaires
and secret wine kings and secret cocaine
kings, despising every phase of thoroughbred

202
and honor-bound American Democracy? Despite
all the doings of the month of May, not
one hiding place of their gold has been unearthed,
not one case of their wine has been
dug up and confiscated by the Federal Government.

“Yet their children know these secret treasuries
and meet in these halls to corrupt all
the other children of the city. From way below
gilded roofs the poison venders ascend
by tortuous and shameful passages and go
forth to dance and destroy and defeat the
plain will of the people as recorded in initiative,
referendum, and recall, and elections at
the polls and guild elections:—and even, at
the height of their folly, to whisper Singaporian
treason.”

And so St. Friend has done and Surto Hurdenburg
beside me takes him with exceeding
literalness and goes forth to agitate and organize
even more zealously till this battle
is over.

Monday, June 16:—Such is the protean
character of human nature that at least one
third of that congregation of yesterday, having
their costumes already prepared, think
it is a pity not to use them, and are in the parade

203
this afternoon, which comes immediately
after business hours, at four o’clock.

The parade is led by Velaska, and her
minions are scattering giant asters from her
yellow barge. She is an unknown and wears a
yellow mask. All this is a tradition of these
parades. The pantomime acts and dances, the
width and length of the block, made up of a
thousand clowns and jesters with baubles, go
by; and Falstaffs without number. Because
of the vacuum-cleaned streets and streets not
so hard as of old underfoot, endless dancing
and delicate and crisp and diaphanous effects
can be secured and kept effective. But it is
all yellow, not orange:—from Bacchus and
Ariadne to the April gods and goddesses of
all of Asia. Three great ballets, the New
York, the New Orleans and the St. Louis, are
imported to dance their way down the streets.
The parade follows the exact route of the
other and pours north on Sixth defiantly past
the Cathedral, where I am watching it as it
ends. The crowd has begun to clear away.
There is a rabble of automobiles. Then there
is a queer hush. The auto horns stop blowing.

There comes the palanquin of the Man of
Singapore, followed by that of his daughter,
Mara:—such familiar sights to a certain number

204
of Springfield citizens, that the element
they add to the day’s pageantry is nominal,
but to those sensitive on the issue it is everything
politically.
The Boone Ax
reporters
scan once more, for the thousandth time, the
unreadable faces of the two, searching out
the Mystery of Asia. The man bows to his
friends and the girl does the same and, according
to those who have seen them many times
before, their aspect is not one hair’s breadth
changed from former occasions. The blazing
green, in the name of the Green Glass Buddha
of Singapore is, if anything, a rest to the eyes
after the uncanny yellow in the name of other
less mysterious gods.

I am most of all impressed with the fact,
seeing him for the first time, that the Man
from Singapore is, after all, in his Asiatic
way, a superb gentleman. His daughter seems
to me the most high bred of gazelle-like ladies,
which, indeed, I had known from her
child portrait by Sparrow Short and by
Short’s careful report of her ways.

So it is hard for the honest puritans of
The
Boone Ax
, even those who were not born yesterday,
to find legitimate place for a new denouncing
of the Professor of Malay Arts and
Letters and his daughter. And so the late

205
evening edition of
The Boone Ax
calls them
“the two strangers.” That is all.

I have a jolly evening with Old Sparrow
Short in the Tom Strong Lunch Room. There
with many others, friends of the halls, Short
is quite frank over the issue of tomorrow and
prattles away at the pessimists. He feels, for
a certainty, all needed is that everyone there
glow and enthuse. Coffee Kusuko owns most
of the Yellow Halls, of course. That means
he uses them any way Slick Slack Kopensky
and Mayo Sims direct, at a crisis, and tonight
the talk at the neighboring tables is all for
the Yellow people and as loud as possible to
be skillful. This is true in the Drug Stores of
Smith as well, no doubt, for they are in the
same combination.

Then later in the evening we go together
to take Avanel to the Hall of Velaska, somewhat
to the astonishment of Short, who knows
she hates him. But she wants to give him a
chance at her approval, through his pictures.
When the revellers sight my lady, the leers
fade, and the boa constrictor dances of Singapore
subside. And the gray head of Short
puts them somewhat on their dignity, even if
they merely regard Avanel with spite. But so

206
many of them are sage and solemn with her
and bow so carefully!

“They are trying too hard,” says Avanel.

Sparrow Short shows us the mottoes he has
painted high on the walls:

“Good Cheer Can Save the Soul.”

“Let us Cultivate the Patience of Humor.”

“Let us Seek the Humility of Humor and
Laugh at Ourselves.”

“The Touch of Humor is in all Successful
Politics.”

“No Man is Too Awkward to Dance.”
(But he has never danced in his life!)

Then he shows us the picture of Velaska,
the mythical muse of the Hall. Velaska
is expecting her lover. She is dressed in the
heaviest and most pretentious of yellow silks;
were it not for her veil, there would be no
harmony. But it is iridescent, covers her
from head to foot, blending and modifying all.

She wears her yellow mask. Short says:—“Her
lover will not see her face till the dawn,
when she lays aside her veil also.”

He is quite proud of his picture. Avanel
is politely interested and no more. The picture
gives me the headache, I am sure it is
the poorest thing Short has done. He thinks
it is the flag of liberty, almost equal to the

207
Star Spangled Banner, and the Declaration
of Independence, and Washington’s Farewell
Address. Avanel dances with many loving
and devoted boys. Avanel admires enthusiastically
all the other pictures of Short and
his decorations. But it is plain, when the
evening is over, they still hate each other.

Tuesday, June 17:—Today “Velaska” and
her train are voted out “for good and all.”
Blue-faced Surto Hurdenburg and a thousand
like him have gone from house to house, talking
incessantly. Morality is always keener in
the followers than the leaders, and Hurdenburg
and his kind worked among the sharp
strong-minded semi-obscure people, just a
little better than themselves, whose edge is
not dulled by many successes or the paradoxes
and mixed alliances that come about through
the long possession of power.

Some Yellow Dance Hall people charge that
Drug Store Smith, Coffee Kusuko, and Slick
Slack Kopensky pocketed the campaign fund
of the dug-up gold, to bury it in their own
pits.

The “dead game sports” of the city roar
themselves purple about a “tyrannical minority”
and “horrible puritanism” despite the

208
heaviest majority against them that the
laughing city ever polled on any issue. They
try to spread the wild rumor that “tobacco
and coffee will go next and then the theatre.”

209

CHAPTER XIII

HOW BLUE-FACED SURTO HURDENBURG IS LYNCHED. HOW THE TOWN SWEEPS ON INTO THE GLORIES OF SUMMER AND JUNE BRIDES AND THE GORGEOUSNESS OF THE TOWERS FROM NIGHTFALL TILL MIDNIGHT. HOW MY LOVE AND I ARE AGAIN ENSNARED BY DEVIL’S GOLD.

June 20, 2018:—Last night was presumably
the time of the final closing of the halls, at
precisely five minutes of twelve. So at five
minutes of eight or thereabouts, one of the
younger members of the Montague Rock family
brings, with great secrecy and under special
devices of disguise, a treasury of wine
from beneath some cellar of his clan and distributes
it to a carefully censored company in
the Yellow Hall of the Mythical Velaska. The
world begins to burn for those here assembled
for their farewell dance. It so happens that
Hurdenburg, intoxicated from the mere drink
of victory, hears the noise as he passes. He
mounts the stairs. He breaks past a guard
who has himself had enough drink to make

210
him too easy. But the remainder of the company
have had enough to make them too
stern and at the very sight of the “puritan”
Hurdenburg, they turn to beasts. They have
been saying, moreover, that they were going
to hang the whole Board of Education and
“every other damned hypocrite in town.”
They have been denouncing, with some
shrieks, “the millions of rank hypocrites”
with which America is beset, hypocrites who
banish the gold and the alcohol to the cellars
and will not permit people to be “honest millionaires”
and “honest drunkards” when
they please. “What the town really needs,”
they have been saying,—and Crawling Jim,
slayer of Beau Nash, has been saying it the
loudest,—is a vigilance committee. What the
“holy city of Springfield needs is a committee
to hang with ropes all people who attempt
to regulate the religion or the habits of their
neighbors.” By religion, Jim probably means
the Singaporian religion but does not stress
that point.

And so, at sight of Hurdenburg, the infamous
minion of the wicked St. Friend, Hurdenburg
drunk on political and ecclesiastical
power, they make a rush for him, and, led by
crawling Jim, this crew, in the masks of the
Mythical Velaska, tie Surto Hurdenburg to a

211
pillar. They drink more buried treasure, as
they decide what to do with him. They formally
and solemnly conclude that they will be
merciful and not follow the well established
American lynching custom of burning alive,
though Hurdenburg, in this case, deserves
such treatment. They untie him from the pillar,
and carry him to the foot of a Golden
Rain Tree of Democracy. Crawling Jim puts
the noose in place. Then Hurdenburg is
hanged by the neck till he is dead. And
the merrymakers go back to the hall undisturbed
and dance till five minutes before
twelve and then the city police close the hall,
according to expectations. The followers of
the masked Velaska go home, apparently
satisfied with one night’s work, most of them
in the arms of one another and quite drunk
with wine. It is toward morning a policeman
finds Hurdenburg, cut down by an unknown
hand, lying in the grass.

June 24:—All local papers, including
The
Boone Ax
, roar about the lynching for one
day, then proceed to minimize it as much as
possible. So I will do the same in this chronicle,
being loyal to my city. A Chicago paper
of infamous repute is glad to “have something
on” Springfield and sends down gloating
reporters, who make the very worst of it,

212
rehash Springfield’s political history for the
last month, putting the ugliest face on everything,
tracing through the city their own kind
of history.

June 25:—Rumors of the threatened lynching
of all the accepted leaders of the town
are circulating from the City Hall, though the
City Hall people are with the greatest impartiality
included in the rumors. The Board
of Education is not frightened. The city today
proceeds to give Hurdenburg a wonderful
funeral. This funeral seems to ring the doom
of infamous Yellow Halls for all time. Saint
Friend preaches a funeral sermon with tremendous
fire.

June 26:—It appears that the bad bloods of
the town are frantically devouring their own
souls, or leaving. The city has been losing,
since the election and the lynching, as much
genius as it does deviltry. Sparrow Short
who has been obliged to take down his pictures
and hang them defiantly in his own
studio, has turned into a profane old varlet,
amazing to hear, and is inciting as many
pupils of ours as possible to leave Springfield.
He is himself threatening to leave. But he
does not leave. “Certainly it is no hardship,”
as the Sentimental Romanoff says, in

213
The Boone Ax
, “to see departing the most of
those with a special talent for raising Cain.”
And he remarks on what an awful row they
would have made, had they been sent out of
town. The coffee houses still exist. There is
no denying that they are getting pretty lively,
considering that nothing but coffee is dispensed.

Rabbi Ezekiel, moreover, with all care to
defer to the aged St. Friend in a personal
way, declares that the photoplay movement,
being no longer in alliance with questioned
places, is destined to go forward with fresh
life. He admits that the abolition of the halls
is justified, though he took no part in it. But
he is a motion picture fan, whatever the turn
of history.

June 27:—My whole feeling over the fights
about the halls is that I have not had much
chance, after Avanel’s promise to dance there
with me. I have had only an evening or so.

As for the lynching, the court proceedings
promise to drag on, as they always have in
such cases. Everyone knows nothing will be
done except postpone. Everyone knows it was
Jim, yet no one knows it, and the Janitor of
the Yellow Hall is the only person whose
name gets into the papers.

214
June 28:—The Thibetan Boy, that the
Romanoff dubbed the Muttering Thibetan,
now swings into my life, and as though he
were a guide sent from wonderland, with
sealed orders just opened, he takes me the
rounds of Springfield and the whole city becomes
new. It is not a place of individual sinners
and saints. The City’s architecture
seems to breathe and live for him. The tiniest
gargoyle takes on personality and citizenship.
All this morning he has been taking me
through the gardens of Mother Grey. These
gardens seem built rather than planted. The
trees are green walls and roofs. I am amused
to note there is no prejudice against dandelions,
since, in a former existence, I had so
many to dig up. They now make the carpets.
He takes me into the temple studio of Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Third, who is especially
busy for young university student girls
who expect to be June brides in the next two
or three days. This studio is a place established
for the innermost circles of the flower
religion. Before each altar is a design to be
set up and kept glorious in some new cottage.
Several of these are for a new row of cottages
near Washington Park called Bridal Row.
The temple is full of the fluttering brides of
tomorrow, seeing the last touches and consulting

215
about what candles and incense to burn,
and asking over and over what flowers are
permitted by the Flower Religion Marriage
Service, which is the one most preferred by
the exquisites of 2018.

June 29:—Avanel and I have developed a
favorite walk: the Lincoln’s monument region.
We pass under many of the Golden
Rain Trees and Ezekiel Oaks, to the Apple-Amaranth
Grove that was the first in Sangamon
County, and the Grave of Hunter Kelly,
in the midst of it. There are the old pick and
spade of the Devil, always left on the grave.
When we do not walk in this region we are
apt to be looking this way from the Truth
Tower, from the lookout room of the newspapers,
or looking back from the telescope
room of the Ashland Gate. Avanel is generally
very solemn looking this way, planning
new processions and dances in praise of Hunter
Kelly and the next festival of Hunter
Kelly, July 11.

June 30:—Avanel has four suitors in
Springfield. I am often but a ghost in my own
eyes and always but shadow to them. On the
hot summer days she goes with three of them
to the gigantic porcelain-lined swimming pool
of Bunn Park, with two girls, a merry six.

216
I hardly have my turn with her for several
days at a time.

One of her suitors is an engineer. One is
a motor-truck driver. One is an aviator. I
sometimes find myself the servant of all three
men, but ignored as servants may be. As
clouds, mists and smoke seems to choke me,
through the whirlwind, I am sometimes
the absurd unregarded dragon engine bearing
her and the engineer to Chicago. While
she laughs as his guest in the engine cab I
must look down the track through the murk,
and I cannot turn round and see the face of
her lover, and the skies are laughing at me
forever. Sometimes I am in my dream
the absurd auto-truck engine, carrying her
and the driver, as he delivers his last consignment
of goods from the central market.
Even the stones of the street laugh at me as
we rattle over them. I am only a mechanical
toy, and the traffic in the street, preparing
for the great World’s Fair, drowns out the
whispers of the young people.

Sometimes I am the ridiculous flying machine
in which she rides as though to mock
me, with the third lover. I must soar on and
carry them and they go through fearful
storms and up through inconceivable blackness
and I cannot see before or after. Even

217
the sound of the rushing wind drowns out
their words.

And as these men dismount from their chariots,
and as they are on the point of passing
by me, with their lordly airs, I turn to dust.
I am as dust of the road swept up by a little
puff of wind. And then the witchcraft continues
and I find myself a coal digger in the
mine beside young Joseph Bartholdi Michael,
the Third, or laying brick with him somewhere,
and I know that I am such stuff as
dreams are made of.

My fourth rival is the one I most fear.
He is a twenty year old libertine, a kind of a
Lord Byron. He loves her now, for a day. His
name is TIME. To torture me the more and
lure me on from the desire for perpetual death
and to prepare me again for a more futile
struggle, he gives me deep and curious days
with Avanel, when we seem to be twin explorers
of the Universe. And then I have big
athletic days with her when I seem, not a
ghost, but something as substantial as a
strutting turkey gobbler.

So this last day of June, in the Mystic Year,
after a big swim at Bunn Park, amidst
thousands of gay mermen and mermaids, we
plan an all-afternoon and all-evening walk.
And we go west on Wellesley Avenue and

218
north on Sixth Street, all the way to the
Sangamon River and to Sangamon River
Park. We find there a cage we have never
seen before. It is between the ice pit of the
grizzly bears and the yard of the giraffes.
It is a large cage. In it a pair of new animals
pace back and forth, trailing their quills on
the ground. The cage is marked. “Quilled
Lions from Java.” They do not seem as fierce
as lions, but have a more human peering,
way. They seem to be deeply interested in the
world rather than angry with it. The male
animal marches round and round his mate.
She is like him even to the collar of gorgeous
quills that rise and fall. The heads of these
sagacious beasts differentiate them further
from lions. They have a bit more skull structure,
and at the same time are more Satanic
in their foreheads and their faces. They seem
to speak to each other by signs, by glances,
and mere pacing together. It gives the impression
of being most detailed and constructive
conversation. Meanwhile, the crests go
through chameleon changes. The beasts watch
the setting sun as intently as we have ever
done, and the spike-quill collars follow every
evanescent turn of the hues.

Avanel says: “Whatever these animals are,
they ought not to be in a cage. If they could

219
only be taught the English language, or we
could learn theirs, we might make them mascots
for the city, or even Lord Mayor and
Wife.”

The attendant says: “Do not go too near.
Those quills are poison.”

“Yes, indeed,” answers Avanel as the light
dawns instantly. “And Java is almost the
same as Singapore. We might have known
such beasts came from near Singapore. I have
heard of them. They are the Singaporian
lions.”

Then we forget these beasts and walk
eastward along the Sangamon River Drive.
Through the openings of the trees and from
the higher points we look back southward.
We have had our feast and our Amaranth-Apples
in the Sangamon Park pavilion. The
star chimes are ringing. The towers are
there to the south. What torch bearers
before time have equalled these priest-wizards
with entrails of fire? They are
sterner than priests. They are the soldier-machines
of liberty that will sweep the
world. They are the Macedonian phalanx
that will decide for another century every
field upon which they will appear. The merchants
of Singapore refuse to use the Sunset
Towers, when they build their new cities in

220
their battle for world supremacy, and even
by that they are doomed. The houses and
commercial palaces and temples of Singapore
crouch little and low, like huts in a forest, or
glass pagodas in little stage comedies. They
are fearful of the incantations hatched in our
hives of electrical flame that shine on to the
glory of Louis H. Sullivan and Frank Lloyd
Wright, who planned the first ones, a century
ago, and the Thibetan Boy and John
Emis, who build them today.

Avanel and I walk south to the city down
beautiful Fifteenth Street. The city is the
Fair and the Fair is the city, though there
has not yet come the formal proclamation
to the world of the opening. There is not one
heart on the street but seems to be beating
happily. The elation in the air on this perfect
June night is worth a lifetime of groans. It
seems to me that for this hour Springfield has
been patiently toiling and staggering on, despite
much sorrow and sin, for a century. All
the children of this generation seem to sweep
by us and to be spending the stored up capacity
of themselves and all their ancestors for
jubilation.

There are hundreds of unspoiled sightseers
in the crowd looking on the lights of
Springfield, often for the first time. These

221
visitors will not wait for the Mayor’s proclamation,
that the Fair has begun.

And they are happy, but not as we two are.
The bass viol orchestra of the lacquered and
rumbling pleasure wagons sings a special
song to us though we be independent walkers.
We hear them, we boast, better than
they hear themselves. There is a babble and a
roar that is the beating of the vast heart of
Springfield. Its rhythm goes into our footfalls
every instant.

It is late, and Avanel insists on going on,
in the intoxication of weariness, and will not
let me take her to her house on Mulberry
Boulevard. She leads me into the very thick
of the great forest of Sunset Towers again,
now “midnight towers,” she says to me, with
her face flushed to a deep crimson from utter
weariness, and her eyes heavy with the desire
for sleep, and her determined little feet still
dancing nervously on. And this is what her
soul says to me, and what we say to one another,
in our fashion, as we whirl on: “Not
until another civilization rises here, will there
be a rival form to these towers. It is only a
matter of years till the type be perfected by
John Emis or the Thibetan Boy or their kind.
The first generation of ripened builders came
a century ago. That was our Early Renaissance.

222
At last our High Renaissance has
come. The ripe architectural genius will
appear who will gather to himself all that
can be known of beam and girder and
truss, of foundation and wind pressure and
the distribution of light, all that can be
learned about hollow brick and tile, of pillar
and elevator and fireproofing. He will understand
the chances peculiar to his materials
and town. His imagination will be a smelter,
a mastered volcano. He will have visions of
welded steel that will put all men to shame
but the builders of the Parthenon, the hewers
of the Sphinx. There shall be no borrowings
from Paris or Rome.

“The least minor decoration shall reflect
the majesty of the dream, as the Gothic altar
carving repeated the flying buttress and the
spires leaping heavenward.

“Because we take our pleasure at the feet
of the Sunset Towers, now ‘midnight towers’
while the midnight stars go by, they
shall be reembodied and perfected in the sons
that shall spring from them like light.

“They are the rose and gold progenitors of
Springfield, the rainbow patriarchs of Springfield.
They stand proudly through the night
and the lighted streets below them are like a
carpet of goldenrod and dandelions unrolled

223
at their feet. Their heads are so far in the
heavens they converse with their serene sister
the moon. They look out together to the
Springfield University and the Sangamon
River where the bridges sweep to the north,
sparkling threads in the mist. They look
south to the Street of Past History that bends
around till it meets them.

“Who shall dispraise the excellence of our
towers? They look west with all the pioneers,
and the very soul of far off, west-going Daniel
Boone is in them.

“We take our pleasure, honorable, or philosophical,
innocent or stupid or guilty, at
their feet, and where pleasure is, there art is
born. Many songs shall be sung to them,
many new names given to them. Their children
shall rise up to call them blessed. Their
children shall be a world-conquering city all
about them, before the relentless sun looks
down upon their ruins, before that blazing
lion of time shall have eaten their bones of
steel.

“They were born from the black soil of Illinois
and from the heart of the Thibetan and
from the Red Indian and the Afro-American
and all the tribes of the earth. There is in
them many an antithesis to all the old architectures
and structures.

224
“The noblest thing to be seen from their
heights is the mighty northwest road. For
the souls’ highway will stay open and crying
for the souls of men to follow when these
towers are dead and gone.”

Now it is way past midnight, and we are
at old Fifth and Monroe, and all the street
cars and vehicles have long stopped, and the
light in Dodds’ drug store is dim, and the all-night
clerks are nodding behind the cases, or
chatting at the ice cream tables, half awake.

And so Avanel and I, walking in one dream
together, know not whether we see with the
human eyes that perish or the eyes of eternity.

Suddenly something of the cry of the earth
reaches us, and there, camping at the crossing
of the street car tracks of Fifth and Monroe
is the Handsome Medicine Man, Devil’s
Gold. He is shaking his bead covered rattle,
making medicine, and dishonoring our souls
with his leer. And he calls us by name as we
stand directly in front of him. We are so
tired from our long walk, we cannot but admire
his gilded face and his yellow magic
blanket.

Holding each other’s hands like lovers we
stoop and admire ourselves in the golden pool
that flickers in the great campfire he has impudently

225
built at the crossing of the street
car tracks.

We walk down through the pool into a
mundane world, so perfect its materialism
becomes magical, and into many an underground
field and forest of wonder, and as we
look into each other’s faces and admire one
another we are moving gilded images from
head to feet. But since we are, at least, together,
a hundred-year hunger in the very
midst of my heart is thus terribly satisfied,
though I am frightened at a betrayal I cannot
understand, as though the heavens themselves
had lied. We take the wickedest pleasure in
looking upon the yellow world around us.
And we hear on the air the laughter of the
Handsome Medicine Man, Devil’s Gold.

226

CHAPTER XIV

HOW I MAKE CERTAIN EXPLORATIONS OF THE GREAT DEEP. HOW I LATER FIND MYSELF THE MALAY SLAVE OF THE MAN FROM SINGAPORE AND THEREBY GET AN ENTIRELY NEW ANGLE ON NEW SPRINGFIELD.

July 2, 2018:—This morning Avanel telephones
to me as she is looking out of her
bedroom window over Mulberry Boulevard
and South Grand Avenue, she wants me to
meet her at once on her lawn and to hurry, for
there is a strange giant bird like a burst of
flame, in a mulberry treetop. And so before
it goes, (and it was there yesterday morning
at dawn and hurried away), I am able to
meet the Lady Avanel, as she stands in her
hasty kimono and bedroom slippers, and goes
wild over the marvel singing overhead and
eating mulberries for all it is worth. It is a
kind of Singing Bird of Paradise, lost here
unaccountably from the tropics. Birds of
Paradise do not sing, but most sweet music
this one makes. He flies down the street and
away into the sun at the moment the whole

227
orb appears. He seems to go to the center of
it, like an arrow of a demi-god.

This afternoon and evening are the final
drill times for the solemn festival in praise
of Hunter Kelly, on July the eleventh. I
watch the rehearsal. It is directed by Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Third. The main
dances, especially the drills on chosen white
ponies are directed by the Lady Avanel, being
modifications of the solemn marchings and
countermarchings of the Gordon Craig Theatre.
In this eleventh of July festival to celebrate
Hunter Kelly’s first planting of the
Amaranth Orchards, there are to be great
comic dancers, and clowns, but they are completely
overshadowed by the devout ceremonial
processions, horseback or afoot. Like all
rehearsals, the affair drags interminably;
much of the stateliness is still to be taken for
granted, till the final occasion. It is a weary
Avanel, who sends her pony home by a friend,
and takes dinner with me in the Lincoln Park
Pavilion and her eyes are unnaturally bright
and she is silent and half crying. She pulls
her napkin to pieces and then the card, from
nervousness.

She says:—“Why are you here with me,
awkward and ill dressed man! Unmannerly
and uncouth man! Yokel and anarchist! Why

228
run around with that mussy old Sparrow
Short all the time and then expect to appear
in fashionable places?”

And then, after a silence, she continues:—“There
is nothing respectable about you. All
the best people of the city make fun of you
and wish you would leave town. Why do you
stay here? Why not go to some other town
and start fresh? You have offended all our
first families by your queer manners and
gauche ways. And you will never improve
them as long as you run around with that
mussy old Sparrow Short. Certainly none of
the real people, accomplishing anything, have
any use for you. I do not believe you even
know how to make out a check or keep a
bank book. And how on earth you expect to
get along in Springfield without dancing or
playing cards I cannot understand.

“Why are you here, you silly man?”

And so I say to her: “Do you think it has
cost me nothing to struggle up through the
dust and the dead grass and walk beside you?
Do you think it has cost me nothing of pain to
beat with my poor bare knuckles through the
years?”

But when I say such things to Avanel, she
does not hear them.

But I am determined and I say: “Last

229
March you came galloping up the Northwest
Road on your white pony, and I was buried
too near the highway to sleep, with such glory
going by. A man may hardly expect to live
again beyond the life of that little earth that
surrounds his bones, and feeds the roots of
the nearest tree. He may, perhaps give life
through the leaves of that tree to the locust
in the bark, or to the squirrel in the branches,
but your song came past my grave like a
fairy’s breath, and my ashes are again man
or fire or weed or living thorns, or what you
will them to be. If you will have nothing of a
man, why give life to his dust?”

But when I say such things to Avanel, she
does not hear them. I am a gauche beau,
that is all.... The mists sweep down
upon us, and we are on the very eastern edge
of Chaos, where it storms in upon the shore
of created things. And Avanel’s eyes are
sleepy and her voice is faint and far away.
But she says: “Do you think I dance for
temporal Springfield, or make my pony dance
for such a city? We dance for an audience
of the great deep.”

Looming across the gulf is the gigantic
porch of the Palace of Eve, its pillars reaching
up into the highest clouds of the storm,
pillars that are Doric, archaic, immemorial.

230
And out of the gulf between rises the vague
splendor of Avanel’s Dream City of the Great
Deep. Avanel says:—

“Any one with Daniel Boone’s hunting
knife in her belt needs no pompous false
prophets of democracy to tell her the road to
freedom. In this gulf alone is freedom, if it
is to be found, and in this gulf only, is tomorrow.”

And as she speaks Avanel’s Dream City of
the Great Deep takes form and is a picture
of the Springfield we have left behind, but
utterly transcendent, with the Sunset Towers
in jewelled glory, with the Truth Tower like
a pillar hewn from the white mountains of
the sun, and around the town, star shaped
double walls, with the pillar oaks between
them. But even that dream crumbles and falls
into nothingness. It becomes a great cloud
plain, a bridge for spirit-feet, over the gulf.
And then I see, as I sit lonely, the real dance
and ceremonial of Hunter Kelly begin. I see
Avanel on her dancing pony of white fire,
surrounded by her devoted maidens, while
dim and shadowy similitudes of branches of
the Amaranth-Apple, made gigantic to shade
the Universe, bend above the far off ministers
of stately cosmic festival.

As I watch the dance with eyes like those

231
of a far-seeing bird, I behold a dim flashing
under the shadow of the gigantic pillars
of the Palace of Eve. As it were, a
candle flame in the storm, Mother Eve, the
immortal, looks up and down those great
pillars and up to the clouded and roaring
zenith with its tossing flowering boughs, and
then to the solemn dances, far away. She sees
her fairest daughters do honor to Hunter
Kelly, pupil and friend of Johnny Appleseed.
Nothing stranger or more beautiful ever happened
in the shadow of her palace or beneath
a flowering storm.

July 4:—I am today in the wonder of a
triple consciousness. To the sense of being
an Anglo Saxon of the centuries of 1920 and
2018 is added that of being a Malay of 2018:
I find myself in the house of the Man from
Singapore, his Malay slave. I find myself
equipped with singular habits, ideals, and
ideas, as though I were the mainspring of a
most unfamiliar clock. I am interested in the
wheels that keep going.

It is a blasting Fourth of July and one of
the second servants, whom I have haughtily
sent down town on an errand, tells me, on returning,
that the thermometer at Dodds’ drug
store already registers one hundred and ten

232
in the shade. But we are so much over arched
by old trees, our house is cool enough.

Remembering various ill-reports when I
lived in other bodies in Springfield at this
time, I am astonished to find the Man from
Singapore a person of domestic grace. He has
consideration for my feelings as a slave. He
has an outstanding gallantry toward the darling
of his heart, his only child, Mara, the
queen of his house. The picture of her departed
mother hangs in the book room of the
Professor of Malay Arts and Letters. It looks
down gently upon many lounging mats and
books left open. The face is all dignity and
languor and devotion.

My master’s ancestors, according to his
conversation with his daughter at late breakfast
this morning, had an original Malay
strain.

But added to that was a peculiar mixture
of Anglo Saxon remittance man, Chinese
banker and Arab trader. It is the combination
that crystallized into the caste to which
he now belongs, the caste that finally gave
distinctive energy to his polyglot, worldshaking
city, and lifted the mystic diabolism
of the Cocaine Buddha into aggressive imperialism.
His new caste found themselves
resolving to make Singapore a city worshipped

233
like Mecca, if they had to cut the
throats of two thirds of the human race to
bring it about.

And so, at this late breakfast, he looks into
his coffee languidly, but as though he saw
pictures of history there. He says that the
English admixture in his caste has long given
them insight into the west, and kept English
for their main language. The English strain
has also given the Singaporian a facility in
taking on the most modern scientific devices,
and has endowed the proud island with political
common sense for routine political tasks.
The Chinese blood has given them patience
and iron, to work on a hundred-year plan, first
in their trade relations and banking arrangements,
and then in all policies linked up with
these. But now it is the sword of the far off
ancient Arab disposition that is beginning to
flash.

The Man from Singapore speculates, drinking
more coffee, and looking reverently at
his daughter. He wonders what he and
others will pay, for almost breaking caste in
their joining themselves with the honorable
but too voluptuous and beautiful Kling caste.
So many of them are marrying women of her
mother’s race, and paying the high priests
tremendous sums for the privilege. He wonders

234
if it will bring them to inefficiency, and
smother the Arab before it has a chance for
complete expression. At least her mother’s
tribe brought them their first energy, for they
owe the gift of the Cocaine Buddha, nearly
a century ago, to the Kling Prophet.

July 5:—I find myself at a civic reform
rally late this afternoon, after business hours.
I am still the Malay servant. I am sent by
Mara, the good and beautiful, to watch from
a distance the doings of the young artist,
altar-builder, coal miner, bricklayer, exquisite
and civic patriot:—Joseph Bartholdi Michael,
the Third. He is her adorer. She sends
me with a note to him, urging him to come to
a suddenly improvised Sumatra chess party.
Like Cleopatra, she urges me to observe his
doings narrowly, and his moods when he
reads her note.

Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Third, is on
the back row of seats. He will take no part
in the meeting, though urged to do so by many
friends around him. The Mayor’s proposition
has been voted down at the polls, his desired
legislation to let great masses of unskilled
labor into the city’s double walls without a
time limit on their stay and without the usual
University examination. Now he proposes another

235
referendum. He wants to introduce his
huskies temporarily, especially Singaporian
bricklayers from California, since, as he says,
our bricklaying machines have broken down
and there is great haste to complete, in time,
the building of the Street of Past History of
the World’s Fair of the University of Springfield.

The meeting, squeezed in between the coffee
house chats and dinner time, has been called
by Michael the Third’s best chums among
the older men:—Boone, and the Rabbi, who
hope to defeat the new measure. The speakers
maintain that, once these laborers are admitted
inside our double Gothic walls, it will
be impossible to expel them, even after the
Street of Past History is finished. They prove
that there are enough bricklaying machines
to fill all the present contracts on time. They
maintain that there are endless boys in the
High School Labor Department trained to
follow up and finish the work in the wake of
such machines as may surely be impressed
into service.

All this while that solemn conceited pumpkin
Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Third,
thinks he is brooding like Prince Hamlet himself.
He will not say how much he believes
of these accusations hurled about.

236
Now rises old Black Hawk Boone and I am
indeed amazed to see him through Singaporian
eyes. He looks almost like a whey-faced
creature, he is so much whiter than my
master. And he looks like the world’s greatest
fidget, my master is such a languorous
cat. And for all Boone’s shrewd, cinnamon
bear countenance, he seems to me a simple
baby, my master looks so wise. And when he
speaks of my master by implication, I cannot
but be insulted. For my body and nerves
tonight are Malay, whatever my soul may be.
And at the same time I am in a terrible fear
of Boone as one would be of a child with
lighted matches in a powder mill. There is in
him a certain divination by force of fury that
I cannot but shrink to apprehend, though I
utterly despise his mind, as long as I wear
this Malay body as a garment and make shift
with these Malay eyes and ears and this Malay
sixth sense.

Boone’s fury is everything. His words are
nothing. In his capacity as editor and citizen,
and not as President of the Board of Education,
he denounces my master, who is entitled
to official courtesy as a member of the University
faculty. But it is plainly in Boone’s
thought that the time has almost come for the
parting with the course in Malay Arts and

237
Letters and Allied Studies, and the dismissal
of all oracles therein, though they be the most
learned oracles in the whole world, and the
most courteous creatures above ground.
Boone snaps out his words like a beast straining
at a chain.

He says these conspirators have long
thought they could buy everything, including
the souls of all state capitals. He tells
how, nearly a century ago, Singapore purchased
its freedom from the British Government
at an enormous fee, furnished by the
Chinese Chamber of Commerce of that city.
He tells how the port was immediately lifted
from the rank of seventh to the rank of first
in the world. He shows how, after the death
of the prophet of the Cocaine Buddha and the
local triumph of the religion, this zeal for
purchase became Singapore’s most eloquent
service in that Buddha’s name. They bought
at any price every island north of Australia
and south of Japan, including America’s own
Philippines. He charges that the war in southeast
Asia, a generation ago, was stirred up
by their spies, and while they were ostensibly
with the World Government, the war ended
with a vast increase of their territory by direct
purchase of land and the bribing of many
new and feeble legislatures to vote themselves

238
into the Singaporian Union. Finally he rises
to the height of mere abuse. He lets slip a
most appalling avalanche in the name of his
western God. And he says this Mayor and his
boss have in some way been over-persuaded
by a Singaporian spy, present in the city or
writing to them, and petitioning that they
send for these workmen, who come in as rough
labor. But that “labor” will send by wireless,
code reports to the high priests of the
Cocaine Buddha.

The whole house rises, and the harder
Boone denounces, the more they seem to approve,
and some of them seem to have the
hydrophobia. Race hate sweeps the hall like
a blasting wind. And Boone crouches at the
very edge of the footlights, and roars on.

He declares that some of this alleged rough
labor is morally certain to be a group of high
officers of the army, here to paralyze America
at the exact second the high priests of Singapore
shall choose, using that dreadful secret
gun, that it is whispered through all the
world, is two steps beyond the terrible lens
gun.

Meanwhile these Singaporians, open and
secret, will corrupt the wild and innocent
young blood of our city. Boone charges that
the island capital is the world’s Barbary

239
coast, the one infamy beyond Suez. Among
all the world’s red-eyed and fish-eyed human
derelicts, where cocaine is used to over-energize,
and to make men flashy and reckless,
there always their spies are busiest, and their
missionaries are most pertinacious and successful.
The world around, “SINGAPORE
IS COCAINE.”

Boone continues, in an utterly different
manner. There is that curious slender girl
near the front seat with her companions,
the Lady Avanel, and he does not want
to seem to be speaking of her. But he
says that these Singaporians are as afraid
of white as the native soldiers of the
Indian mutiny were afraid of breaking caste
in their fashion, or the Egyptians were,—which
enabled Cambyses to defeat them by
heading his procession against them with a
small and famous army of kittens. He says
they are as afraid of white as the negroes of
the South were afraid of it, which enabled the
Ku Klux to send them scattering. It is no
idle fancy of his that these people are as
superstitious as the blacks of the old days.
He says that in the last war of the World Government
against the rebels of Asia, where
Chinese, Japanese and Americans won so
great a victory for world unity, there were a

240
few Singaporians among the rebels, denounced
by the Singaporian high priests, but
these rebels seemed secretly authorized, and
they had the typical lens gun equipment and
the complete cocaine soul. And Boone tells
what is evidently a familiar story, how one of
the Springfield Amazons found a mysterious
white pony on the battlefield, after her own
had been shot under her. She rode him to the
front line and drove a whole company of those
cocaine fiends in flight, lens guns and all, with
nothing in her hand but her Michael-forged
blade. Boone says the Singaporians hate
white because it is the color of truth and daytime
and decency, and as for him, if he had
had his way he would have painted every
tower of this World’s Fair white, and the
inner and outer walls of the city white, to
keep out the Singaporian spies and missionaries,
but Slick Slack Kopensky and Mayo
Sims won a victory for the present color
scheme.

Then young Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the
Third, to keep himself right with his friends,
throws off his coat, and goes forward in
the bricklayer’s clothes he has been wearing
beneath. As a former High School student-bricklayer
and one often practicing that profession
still, he pledges himself to go out and

241
work one of the bricklaying machines, or use
the old fashioned trowel, as is needed, until
the Fair buildings are done. And he calls for
volunteers to join him, and many of the gay
young bloods do so at once.

So this evening as I serve the black Siamese
wine to the Man from Singapore and his
daughter, and I stand respectfully at her left
hand, and give my report while her wonderful
smiles come and go, she clasps her hands
and tries to be gay over old Boone. But her
eyes are tragic pools, indeed, when I speak of
her lover, and of the evident conflict in his
heart. And now it is her father’s turn to
laugh and try to shift her mood.

“They blame me with their own petty doings
and are always suspicious at the wrong
time. They never know when I am fighting
the real tigers in the holy cause of our High
Priests. Not as a Singaporian, but as a man,
I am going to give this town a blow with my
left hand. One more word from that baby, that
bawling Boone, holding me in contempt, and
then let him look to himself. It is done more
simply than he knows. The distrust of all
leaders of every faction from Mayo Sims to
Boone is growing every hour. Even those
leaders love a lynching, if it removes an enemy.
They went to the funeral of Surto Hurdenburg

242
for respectability’s sake, not to
mourn him. Not one of all the City Council
or the Board of Education put in an extra
hour seeing that his lynchers were brought
to trial. They are all lynchers and one needs
hardly to accelerate their natural gait a bit,
but only to fail to warn them of what their
own may do. Certainly the Board of Education
would be insulted if they knew that
Sims and Kopensky are as alien and unknown
to us as are Boone and Saint Friend. If they
are putting on their fights to edify  us, the
attempt is a failure. I sincerely hope that
Sims and Kopensky and Boone are hanged by
their adoring citizens side by side on the same
tree. But Montague Rock, I hope, will be
spared to us. He is a fine paw. I will tell you
that much, little Mara.”

243

CHAPTER XV

HOW AS A MALAY I WITNESS THE CONVERSION OF YOUNG KOPENSKY TO THE COCAINE BUDDHA, LATER WHEN I AM MY AMERICAN SELF THE THIBETAN BOY TAKES ME BEYOND THE NORTH STAR AND SHOWS ME THE TRUE BUDDHA.

July 6, 2018:—This afternoon Mara sends
me to find Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the
Third, and report once more. I discover that
he has been at work according to his pledge,
and with a bricklaying machine. There are
more than enough, both of machines and
Springfield workers to complete the Street
of Past History on time.

And so, this evening, the Kling beauty
dawdles through her black wine and cigarettes
looking at her father with an indulgent
and patronizing squint, completely at ease in
the possession of his heart. Though with so
many other strains of ancestry, the Malay
manner predominates tonight, in her as in
him, an outer appearance of super languor,
a suggestion of nerve force accumulating

244
through long seasons, to be discharged in one
day of supreme achievement, or of “running
amuck.”

Suddenly Mara asks her father, as though
to plague him all she dares and startle him
from his languor: “How do I differ from
Avanel Boone? We are, for instance, the
same age.” He answers without a quiver:
“She is a worthy daughter of Black Hawk
Boone, except that she will not dye her left
hand or wear her hair on her shoulders, and
you are a worthy daughter of your father,
except that you like to quiz.”

And she opens her eyes and they seem the
wide gates of his Prophet’s heaven. And they
have, to him, all the dewiness of honest youth.
She asks with earnestness:—

“But
how
do we differ?”

He defies those eyes. He says: “Both have
dark hair, but Avanel’s is straight like that
of the Japanese, and yours is a storm cloud
about your head.

“But
how
do we differ? You need not deny
you have studied that girl like a book. I have
seen you watching her as though she were a
growing scorpion, looking her over and over,
at the Gordon Craig Theatre.

“She is no scorpion, but an artless child.
Her eyes are blue. Your eyes are black.

245
Avanel’s skin is white and rose. You are more
golden than any coin, or any sunrise. That is
the difference.” And he smiles with an air
of mock finality.

But there is more difference and my American
soul fights my Malay body and mind, as
I apprehend this distinction, while they argue
of other matters. I find torturing the very
depths of me, that which loves Avanel, though
I lie in this Malay grave. Yet the comparison
is not all to the advantage of the daughter of
Boone.

Avanel follows the most conventional of

Vanity Fair
and
Vogue
fashion plates, when
not a marching, dancing priestess or an equestrienne
in white. The Kling beauty is in her
library or in her palanquin wrapped in endless
easy swathings of green silk from breast
to knee. Her bare shoulders and knees and
feet and hands are her father’s pride. He
thinks there is nothing like their slender
modelling in all the west. She is a singer with
the Borneo harp. Avanel in her life as a religious
dancer and leader of maiden cavalry
and of the Horseshoe Brotherhood, is an unmaidenly
horror to Mara, who prides herself
on her seclusion. Avanel’s omnipresence on
the streets, as the town heroine, seems to
Mara America’s most complete scandal.

246
Yet Mara has often been out in her palanquin,
behind that of her father, ostensibly to
please him, but actually to see if by chance
this hated Avanel will go by. And she has
brooded in seclusion over Avanel as much as
such a gentle nature can.

Finally, and chiefly, that rare mask, the
face of Mara is the same her father wears, and
so is half a world away from the open countenance
of the lady who carries Daniel Boone’s
direct ancestral dagger. Yet there are things
readable in the Singaporian countenances.
The sincere passion for jungle beauty revealed
in the face of Mara can be discerned.
The Asiatic necromancy, the instinct for intrigue,
is hidden by the innocence of the experiences
of her sheltered days, and also, as in
the face of her really wicked father, it is hidden
by that University air of submitting absolutely
to the open finalities of scholarship.
And so they will often submit, where Singapore
is not concerned. But one would say all
Mara’s scholars are poets to her, and of her
father all his scholars are statesmen. Each is
the other’s flattering image. Each is disarmed
in the presence of the other, artless and fond
and kind.

She continues this evening by talking
frankly with her father about her suitors. I

247
am as a well worn article of furniture. My
ears do not trouble her. Are we not all members
of the order that has sworn in a great
whisper to conquer the world in the name of
the holy green glass image that dwells in the
temple on the far off Raffles plain?

She asks her father which man will be of
the greater service to Our Lord of Cocaine?
Will it be the son of Slick Slack Kopensky,
Crawling Jim:—or Joseph Bartholdi Michael,
the Third, who thinks he has converted my
good mistress to Mary of Bethlehem and all
the saints of the western heaven. Shall she do
lip service to his faith, when he is present,
till the day of all days when Singapore ceases
to whisper and comes roaring against the
world? Or shall she take Crawling Jim for
all time?

She is remarkably interested in both men.
I am all curiosity over her tenderness for
Jim. She calls him James. To be sure, he has
undertaken a perilous thing for a son of
Springfield. He has already discarded the
wearing of anything white.

July 7:—There are not many other Singaporians
in the city, and tonight comes an all-Caucasian
party except for servants, host
and hostess. My amazement about Mara’s attitude

248
toward James now ceases. In this company
he is a new creature.

The ladies and gentlemen who come in for
initiation into that curiosity, a Sumatra chess
game are many of them Jim’s most devoted
henchmen in Jim’s presumably highly democratic
and now triumphant Robin Redbreast
Aviation Club. They were deft enough to
capture the club for him. They are people
of breeding and assurance. As long as it existed,
at the house of the Mythical Velaska
the most famous yellow dance hall, they set
the pace. Tonight they talk openly of their
jolly little lynching of Surto Hurdenburg.
They talk of how to bring back to town all
the malcontents who have left because of the
suppression of the Yellow Halls. They speak
of them as martyrs and heroes. And then
they talk as though they will leave also. With
scarcely an exception they belong to Springfield’s
senior families, many of whom have
been here as long as the Boones, and some
of them before the Michaels. Scions of the
house of Montague Rock are among them, including
Montague Rock, Junior.

By their voices and a thousand impalpable
signs I know that, with scarcely an exception,
they have been educated out of town at male

249
and female finishing schools, on funds or
power secured by the secret sale of their hereditary
buried gold and buried alcohol. These
schools are, obviously, the last stand of
American plutocracy, that has grown most
subtle in what appears to be its final battle.
Here, at this party among friends, with no
spies, and in perfect confidence, they use with
an exaggerated freedom all the secret codes,
passwords, and hints of manner that indicate
the hidden masters of the land, the tribes
with buried gold and buried alcohol.

They are well grounded in the main books
of plutocratic and alcoholic apologetics, one
of which has been written by a fellow townsman,
and it appears today, in Coe’s Book
Store:—“The Graces of Bacchus and Mammon”
by Doctor Mayo Sims. Every poet,
architect, artist, or musician who in any
fine indirect way licks the boots of money, or
sings sweetly of strong drink, has their approval.
Many such craftsmen have been induced
by gentle means to drop a delicate
word for Singapore as the ultimate land of
real aristocracy, and dangerous but marvelously
inspiring cocaine.

Mara’s guests have been taught in these
out of town schools to hate our educational

250
system from the World’s Fair of our University
down to the first grade, ward school. They
are taught in their male and female finishing
schools that the whole city of Springfield and
all such cities are infamously democratic.
These children are taught they must not
let one tone of voice indicate anything more
than a suffering tolerance of that system of
which, in this city, Black Hawk Boone is the
official head.

As the evening progresses, all this crowd
gaily says that Jim’s luck in aviation holds
in Sumatra chess, and the ladies whisper in
their delicate fashion that they hope he stays
lucky when it comes to love.

Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Third, enters
late. He says he is tired from bricklaying and
slumps into the most conspicuous chair like
a second rate actor’s idea of a martyr to patriotism.
Michael, the Third, will not play
Sumatra or any other chess. He will not bet
on any other man’s chess playing. He glares
at the merry Jim, or in his general direction.
He stalks around, like a stork at a dinner of
foxes.

The crowd thins out, and at length the two
men are left with Mara, because J. B. Michael,
the Third, has not sense enough to go. She

251
has given Jim Kopensky every sign and Michael,
the Third, no signs at all.

She wants this exquisite scion of the Blacksmith
clan to play the game, and take his
chance. But he is more at ease in his patriotic
overalls, laying bricks to hurry up the final
official opening of the Fair, and the Street of
Past History.

So she helps Kopensky to back Michael
to the door, which is done by a simple process
of walking toward him with a certain air.

He is overwhelmed at Jim’s assurance and
vital power. But Jim is one of those whom
love makes a man for an hour in a lifetime.
As I open the door for the exquisite Michael,
I divine Mara’s pity for him. But what can a
woman do? No proud Singaporian can have
mercy on an unmagnetic fool. It is not a conspiracy
against the loser. It is an elemental
contest. This red oriental heart is for the
man who wins this doorstep fight. Religion
and destiny wait. And J. B. Michael, the
Third, of his own weakness goes out the door
in defeat.

But Mara, having, without an uttered word,
chosen this James Kopensky for what she
can make of him, turns at once to the cocaine
Buddha around the corner of the hall. Religion
comes next.

252
The triumphant Jim follows her thought.
He takes a candle from the table. He holds it
in front of the august image, that seems to
him more like green air than glass. He bows,
the complete devotee before that ironical god
whose doctrines are absurd, even to me,
though I am for a season in a Malay mind.
But what doctrines are not absurd to that
soul that refuses to receive them?

Jim blows out the candle, and with it his
former life, and, in intention, every western
desire, and all for the glory of the holy islands
of southeast Asia. He relights the candle at
a taller one that is burning in front of the
image.

Just then a telegram comes. Later I am
reproved for letting the boy make the turn in
the hall that enables him to see Crawling Jim
light the candle. It is a real telegram, that
has to do with an out-of-town lecture to be
given by the Man from Singapore, on “The
Republic of Letters.” And so the lord of the
house comes in for it, reads it, and signs. The
boy is not hustled to the door. He lingers.
Our little ceremony is quite interrupted.

At last the slow youth goes. He is the son
of a Japanese Industrial Commissioner to the
World’s Fair. It seems that this man and the
Chinese Commissioner are sufficiently Asiatic

253
to understand my master, and their subterranean
feud with him and his ally, Old Montague
Rock, never has an end. The Man from
Singapore says: “They must have had their
spy at the party tonight. And this telegram
has been delayed as part of their game.”

And so, soon after, the flustered Jim bids
his lady a devout good evening.

July 8:—Mara has been nervous about the
Springfield fortunes of her accepted suitor
all day, but he reports this evening that there
is no cause for apprehension, that he has not
noted one more fluttering eyelid than usual
today. He is still in place, in Springfield.

Then Mara makes ardent haste to talk with
Jim of the religion into which he took a decisive,
if interrupted, first step last evening.
There is a bit of a suppressed strain and the
harshness of argument in her voice, as though
she were debating with all Springfield, though
Springfield is not here. She is showing Jim
that the Singaporian aversion to white, colorless
things, is in no way unreasonable, since
the religion was born in a sweet shadowed
jungle. The whitest thing to be found in such
a woods is the patch of dried grass in the
opening of the trees under the blasting rays
of the noonday sun. The living creature who
lingers there must die. The prophet had

254
talked so long to the religious beasts that he
learned the inner wisdom of this fear. By listening
long to their stories and their teachings,
white came to mean the death of the soul
to him. When he returned to Singapore and
preached his first sermon that shadowy evening
on the Raffles plain, proclaiming the
religion of night, the religion of prowling,
of rich wines and sweeping hanging moss,
he gave them the Holy Green Glass Idol,
and extended the doctrine of the fear of
whiteness. It was there revealed to him,
as he spoke with inspiration, that the
whiter the silver, the whiter the horse, the
whiter the armor, the whiter the plume, the
more dangerous the foe. And so Mara assures
Jim that all the deadliest enemies of the faith
will come in the open noonday, dressed in
white. If Singapore conquers all things white,
and all the noonday races of men it will win
the world. If once it falls before an army in
white, it will be utterly annihilated, and the
Holy Religion of Cocaine will perish from
the earth.

Mara asks Crawling Jim if this is not perfectly
reasonable, as doctrine and as prophecy.
He falls before her. He embraces her
golden knees with his crazy arms. He says

255
it is perfectly reasonable, as doctrine and as
prophecy.

But she lifts him up and she preaches and
kisses away the hours, like any devout lady
in like case.

July 9:—Mara is saying to Jim this evening
that while in the by streets of her holy
city among the dregs of the world’s population,
much cocaine is taken, in the presence of
grotesque libels of the Green Glass Buddha,
as a matter of fact, that is a degenerate form
of the religion. It is well enough since it keeps
the outcasts happy and in subjection, more
easily led, yet fierce in battle like the old
hashish-eating assassins. But the esoteric,
the masters, do not take cocaine. She speaks
lovingly of the Green Glass Buddha, but saying
finally of him, with the University Tone
of Voice, that he is the god of wine. Like
Dionysius he is especially the inspiration of
the drama and all the arts that gather round
it. Upon those patrons of drugs, the two
greatest civilizations have been founded and
the fairest catalogue of the arts.

It seems to me this evening, that the lessons
are done. Mara has called to me to go for
her father. I have ushered him into the room,
and he is receiving Jim, the son of the Mayor

256
of Springfield, as his own son. The Man from
Singapore takes on a manner Jim has never
seen. There are tears in his carved eyes. He
is the headlong devotee in the infatuation of
proselyting.

He tells Jim that those who are faithful
take on the soul of the holy green glass idol,
which was long ago the pure and transparent
spirit of the first king of the boa constrictors,
who, it is recorded, ruled his tribe in integrity
and crystal honor. It is in his service that
Singapore goes forth to choke the earth.
From the god of glass emanate rays of psychic
force that extend world wide, and give
his followers spiritual eyes so they can do
battle for him in the forest of Christianity and
civilization. The war is really between these
faithful ones and the tiger souls that infest
the jungle. The vendetta of the serpents
against the tigers has gone on through the
ages since before there were men. It will not
be ended till all the tigers are gone and the
Great Boa Constrictor swallows the world as
though it were a rabbit.

The Man from Singapore says that the
tigers feed on all men from wantonness, while
the serpents kill only those who interfere with
the spread of their beneficent kingdom and
eat only when hungry. Before the eyes of the

257
true priests of the serpent, all buildings turn
to forest trees and all shadows to forest
boughs, and all men to serpents or tigers or
some neutral beasts. Thus we know our most
dangerous foes. These are not necessarily the
men who curse us. They are often our intended
friends, but actually in the way of the
God of Glass. Thus there is no real serpent
among the citizens of Springfield but Montague
Rock. He is indeed a good Singaporian.
All the other men in power, be they friends or
foes in the open, are tigers alike. Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Second, at the seat of
World Government, is the worst tiger of all.
He is proscribed and doomed.

The Man from Singapore eyes Jim steadily
and continues:—“Does that seem reasonable
to you? And does all I have said seem clear,
logical, infallibly convincing?”

Jim takes the hand of this man and says
it is absolutely convincing. I note that Jim
looks like a composite portrait of the heirs
apparent of all the thrones left in Europe, a
weak and pasty fool, but lit up by love.

July 10:—Crawling Jim lives but in the
eyes of Mara. Everything Singaporian is
reasonable while she smiles, and it is all reasonable
to her. This doctrine of swallowing
the world seems merciful because “father”

258
says it is. And Jim seems to her like a man.
He is aflame with desire, such as only the
daughter of her voluptuous and gentle mother
could provoke, and only such a strong soul as
hers could harness. He is a mirror, pouring
back the rays of her own romantic glory, and
she knows it not. She is incredibly happy, for
she thinks she has done a good stroke for
Singapore and her own heart. I, even as a
Malay, am stirred with a great pity for her.

Her father, also, sees Jim as a hero. The
serpent Buddha has not made this man and
his daughter infallible.

July 11:—Mara is near the window looking
out through the black velvet hangings, watching
for Jim, though it is not time for him to
call. Meanwhile there is indeed an interruption
to her fancies, she utters not a word, she
does not flinch, while there comes north on
Mulberry Boulevard Avanel Boone and her
maiden cavalry.

They are going toward the grave of Hunter
Kelly, to take part in the solemn festival in
the groves there, and along the great Northwest
Road, the festival in celebration of the
planting of the first Amaranth orchard there.
The girls go by like a white whirlwind,
and they give the old Springfield cry used
in battle in Asia by their mothers who

259
were young amazons before them. It shrieks
and screams and sings down the street:
“Springfield Awake! Springfield Aflame!”
They know they are going by the house of
Mara of Singapore but not one eye turns
her way. But the swords, the swords, the
Damascus blades, are hissing and glittering
in the air. And the Man from Singapore, apparently
intent upon his affairs does not
turn to look out of the window of the book
room. He does not so much as look up from
his book of Malay lyrics. He utters one
phrase: “The Cats of Cambyses, if we are to
take Black Hawk Boone at his word.”

I am temporarily of the Singaporians, in
my way. I have their poisoned eyes, it seems.
So, while I have watched, horse and rider
have faded into something new and strange.
They go by in semblance as beautiful white
tigers.

But what of Mara, who regards me as an
article of furniture? What has she seen? Apparently
nothing but Springfield girls on a
wild, lovely, sweet, shrieking revel to which
she has not been invited. She feels “snubbed.”
She is lonely, weary, in this house and city,
though she has a lover and a convert coming
within the hour.

For, after these girls have gone by, she

260
turns to the Cocaine Buddha. She bows with
hands and arms outspread. Hers is a strange
cry and prayer:—

“Master of the World, tell me, am I more
beautiful than Avanel Boone?”

Which proves to me that Mara is only a
girl.

July 12:—I find myself in all respects an
American citizen of Springfield, Illinois, today,
as of old. The hours with Mara and her
father are as a “tale of little meaning, though
the words are strong.” As I wander through
a July rain in our streets, and parks, many
vague hands seem stretched from the ground,
catching me by the heels.

It is much later in the afternoon. The storm
is gone, and I am walking with the lady
Avanel, and she has looked into my eyes and
given me my life again.

We confess to one another that these days
are certainly not the millennium, that many
of them are as grotesque as the early geologic
ages, that had their monster sloths and
lizards big as whales, and what you will.
Avanel says with her happy laughter: “Let
no man declare that the end of time is soon
approaching.”

The lady Avanel has sometimes what might
be called the mood of butterfly wings, and

261
this afternoon, as we go further north
across the fields, we are suddenly walking
on a crimson cloud a little above the trees
and then that cloud on its borders takes on
slowly, first from the edges, the aspect of the
wings of a giant butterfly whose body is at
last the raft on which we stand and ride.
And toward the North Star we go, and when
we reach it, there sits a most grotesque
and turtle-headed dwarf that Avanel calls a
gnome. The North Star is really a hill of
dandelions, and the dwarf is sitting at the
foot of the hill.

We dismount from our cloud and the dwarf
goes with us down a corridor in the hill.
There are on one side mirrors where details
are dimmed, where only big clear outlines of
a possible new Springfield are shown, and
near by are shown plans for other similar villages
in the world. On the other side are
mirrors into which we look and see greatly
magnified the raw machinery of a possible
Springfield in sections that any one can understand.
Then we speed along through the
passageway and at last come through and see
the light of the north sky on the other side
of that gorgeous dandelion hill.

The hill seems to be on the very edge of
things, and though it has much of the aspect

262
of that place to the east where I saw the Great
Palace of Eve, once upon a time, the Dwarf
calls this present cliff disrespectfully: “The
Jumping-off Place.” And Avanel seems
amused and exhilarated. But waves of outer
darkness, into which I have looked so often,
dash upon the cliff.

The Dwarf says: “This particular Jumping-off
Place is one of the principal suburbs
of Springfield, and I have seen all kinds of
Springfield people and dreams jump off
here.”

Then, while we wait interminably, the
gnome lets down an iron bucket by a long
rope, and brings it up full of the perpetually
burning soul bones of animals, men,
and dreams that have jumped off. He says:
“We live by the death of these.” And he
gathers the flames off the top as though they
were burning flowers and his hands were iron.
And he pours the bones back with a great
thunder into the deep of the Jumping-off
Place. Then he eats of the terrible burning
petals and makes us eat them. Then he leads
us back through the corridors and we seem
to have been given eyes to see and remember
every detail of the microscopic cross section
of Springfield and he sends us back riding on
the butterfly cloud, and enjoins the Lady

263
Avanel to help in the building of Springfield,
day after day.

July 13:—Today I meet the Thibetan Boy
in Coe’s Book Store. We are both rather aimlessly
turning over the magazines, and, after
I have observed his idleness awhile, I take him
out for a walk and say: “Why do you look
at me when you pass, with your eyes a story
untold? All the while I have walked the
streets of this New Springfield, you have
looked at me so.”

He answers slowly, almost whispering:—

“Your fathers came from the ancient
Christian world. My fathers came from the
more ancient Buddhist world. Christ is my
master but I cannot deny that Buddha is my
friend. This is the hour for friends. Come
with me.” We walk north on Mulberry Boulevard,
past the House of the Man from Singapore,
and then west on Carpenter toward a
little highway that finally joins the great
Northwest Road. But we have not gone far
on the Great Northwest Road till we flash
past the Gothic double walls of our city.

The Thibetan Boy takes me, in one instant,
to the far edge of Space and Time,
way beyond the North Star and its dandelions.
And as we stand on the shaking shore
of Space and Time we see and hear, rolling in

264
from Chaos, endless smoke and glory and
darkness and dissolving foam. Standing beside
us, like a superb Gandhara sculpture
that has taken on life is that Prince Siddhartha
who was the founder of Buddhism. He stands
in that aspect he had, while still a citizen
and householder, and twenty-four centuries
before his green glass libel cursed mankind.

Before us is, indeed, a vision of Buddha the
dreamer, superb, thoroughbred, in all the
jewels of his tribe. It is the hour before he
took chariot and drove forth from home. We
are back in that hour when he looked upon all
things, and saw them as a dissolving foam,
the hour before he set forth for his victory
over this crumbling universe. His eyes are
fixed upon those waves that roll in forever,
that keep their forms an instant, and are
gone for all time: some of men, some of
wraiths and gods, some of planets and comets
and suns.

He turns around and beckons and over the
sand comes Channa, the superb charioteer,
and the horses of that chariot are nobler than
the horses of the sun. Prince Siddartha is in
the chariot in an instant and they drive out
into that sea and the wheels of that chariot
ride the waves. Those horses are like lightning,
climbing waves that are like hills and

265
mountains, till chariot, horses, and men all
are veiled by the endless smoke and glory and
darkness and dissolving foam. The Thibetan
boy says to me: “It is the ‘Great Going Forth
from Home,’ and thus Buddha becomes a
conquerer, and Chaos and the Universe are
put beneath him.”

But the star chimes behind us are ringing
new tunes and we are back in our city again,
leaving Prince Siddartha to conquer what he
will.

266

CHAPTER XVI

THE RETURN OF SENATOR JOSEPH BARTHOLDI MICHAEL FROM THE WORLD GOVERNMENT TO SPRINGFIELD. HIS CONVERSE OF HIGH IMPORT WITH A JAPANESE ELDER STATESMAN WHO IS A COMMISSIONER TO OUR WORLD’S FAIR.

July 14, 2018:—The regular session of the
World Senate has ended, and all the talk in
the coffee houses is of the imminent return
of Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Second,
namesake of the high dandy of one hundred
years ago, himself a reversion to tribe
still further, in that he is a replica of the
Iron Gentleman, except that he has a hotter
temper in old age, which makes him a
most tigerish fighter in the World Senate.

Today, being the Iron Gentleman’s birthday,
is a family festival with the Michaels
and, in the very early morning, before there
are any passers by, the leading representatives
of the family are hand in hand in silence
around the original forge of the Iron Gentleman,
for a little while. The bellows is blowing
and the fire is high and there is the

267
beginning of a blade in the flame, for they
remember that he has said: “I will return
to you only in the leaping flame of the forge
fire.” Then they repeat the Lord’s Prayer
and disperse, before the town is awake, leaving,
according to custom, one man to finish
the blade, at his leisure:—in this case Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Third.

St. Friend, the Giver of Bread, has told me
that the Michaels in general have old fashioned
Bible reading in their homes, with old
hymns and family prayers, every morning or
evening no matter what pet heresies may be
running through the tribe. Not many of them
accept the formally designed altars of Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Third, they have left
here hammering a blade, unless they are direct
fanatical converts to the Flower Religion.

This evening I find myself one of a party in
the library of St. Friend. We have been
given an uplifting welcome by the saint, and
the Thibetan Boy. Joseph Bartholdi Michael,
the Third, the non-entity whose fortunes seem
always thrust upon me, is of the party. Black
Hawk Boone is there. Our special guest is
Sake Shioya, one of the Elder Statemen of
Japan, and in America because he is head of
the Department of Asiatic Art in the World’s
Fair of the University of Springfield. At

268
home, when not in the Japanese Cabinet, he
is professor Sake Shioya of the Doshisha University
of Japan, and brother of Nataro
Shioya, the leading Japanese representative
in the Senate of the World Government.

For a lifetime the brothers have shouted
through Japan: “We will strike off the head
of the Singapore Snake with the Sword of
the Samurai.” St. Friend passes round the
cigars and, himself, sticks to his corncob pipe.
Perhaps it is because we are under the
portrait of Alexander Campbell our talk
turns to religious controversy. St. Friend
says: “The world over, Jew, Catholic, Protestant,
used to hate each other to the point of
slaughter, though all spoke the name of
Abraham and several other patriarchs with
the same reverence, and invoked Abraham’s
tribal God. Now the Marxians of the world
revere Marx and Hegel as these others did
Abraham and Jehovah, but the only way to
keep them from cutting each other’s throats
is for the World Government to stand between
them.”

“Indeed it is true,” confirms Shioya, “The
Purple Flag Marxians of Japan, the Yellow
Flag Marxians of China, the White Flags of
Thibet, the Black Flags of Russia, the Red
Flags of Central Europe, the Gray Flags of

269
America, all conspire against one another,
with at least five times five which is twenty-five
hates, in all, to be mathematical. Yet
they all read the same Marx to tatters. When
the Yellow Flag Marxians of China agree
among themselves sufficiently to fall upon the
Purples of Japan, a thing we are momently
expecting, the World Government will have
a stern police duty, especially since both
sides are being urged on by Singapore.”

Samiri Shioya, that austere old man,
continues, saying that which he can more
gracefully say than any of the rest of us:
“Instead of a world of three classes, special
privileged, middle class, and peasantry, as
these Marxians think it to be, it is, from my
brother’s standpoint and my own, a globe
whose seas and continents are spread with
fifty to one hundred antagonistic races, mutually
repellent. These fifty to one hundred
races dye thoroughly, with the dye of race-mysticism,
any economic teaching they take
up. So practical world statesmanship, from
the Japanese standpoint and I am glad to say,
from the standpoint of the fiery Michael also,
has dealt with race. Our statesmen advocated
the principle of one vote to every main tribe
in the world and fractional votes in due proportion
to the size of the small tribes, long

270
before your Michael entered the Senate, and
every speech he has made there to strengthen
that doctrine has been cheered from end to
end of Japan.”

July 15:—Senator Joseph Bartholdi
Michael is here and has refused the conspicuous
first place in the great sunset parade and
drill held in his honor and has taken his place
in the ranks with his son, and has demanded
that the whole ceremony be in honor of the
Star Spangled Banner and the International
Flag. Those flags have been put up in special
size and splendor, all over the town, even
more than is the custom. And the borders
of the parks around Camp Lincoln are one
tremendous fleet of these banners. I find myself
on the drill ground near the aged Japanese
statesman. I am huddled on the side of
the reviewing platform with the newspaper
men, and we watch those strange Japanese
eyes, and are amazed at his fiery enthusiasm
for the International Flag. The reviewing
platform is by the famous wrought-iron
gates, hammered out by the Iron Gentleman
and his three sons and three daughters.

Just as he named the sword “The Avanel
Sword,” knowing not of the child who was
coming in one hundred years, he named these
“The Avanel Gates,” for the perhaps mythical

271
Avanel of more than one hundred years
ago.

These gates are massive and towering, yet
a little distance away are wonderfully trellised
vines, seeming to be climbing the white
wall from which the gates are swung.

In the center of each design is a Golden
Rain Tree. The blossoms of the tree are
most delicately wrought, and shining with
gold foil against the black. These trees were,
in especial, the work of the hammers of the
three daughters.

But now, to the delight of the old Japanese,
and the delight of us all, the magnificent
cavalcade of men and women sweeps in from
their city parade through these ancestral
gates, to the Camp Lincoln grounds, in order,
yet in riot, after the manner of a great dance
of gay and inspired horses and horsemen.
And they are all within the command of
Avanel, standing high in her stirrups, and
as much beneath her eye and as subject to
her entranced fancy, as has been St. Friend,
the Giver of Bread, when she uttered his sermons
for him, hardly knowing how she did
it, except that she spoke her mind.

The men on horseback are but the background
of the girls in their Diana mood. The
huntress, and yet the Pallas Athena, seems

272
roused in all these girls in white. Most of
them are in their first strength:—high school
girls when they are still a bit Tom boy; that
which is with every girl for a year or half a
lifetime as a reminiscence of the primeval
girlhood of her far grandmothers, when they
rode the two-toed and three-toed horse in
equestrian dance and revel.

High above all the other flags, on gigantic
poles on either side of the reviewing stand,
are the official flags of the field. The poles are
of equal height and the flags are of identical
size and importance in the eyes of the paraders,
as they salute them and salute the
Japanese each time round the field:—while
the afterglow turns the air to crimson and
orange and grey pearl.

They go by screaming and screeching with
delight, and sweep and cut the air with
their Avanel blades in a sunset sword-drill.
When they pass Avanel, whose horse is now
near us, the salute in sign of submission to
her pride, is given with all a girl Amazon’s
fantastic chivalry: the Boone dagger, lifted
high overhead. In her person at least, the
Boones of Springfield have put the Michaels
of Springfield under their feet. And certainly
the whitest thing in the whole whirlwind of

273
white is the spirited head of old Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Second. Whatever the
morrow between these clans, his submission
is made as she sights him, and he bows and
salutes in the last afterglow, and she forces
him to lead the review beside her.

The Japanese watches and wonders and
says to the press gallery that of course no
day can be women’s day and men’s day
equally, and this is one of the days of the
women.

Now all the while I have been wondering
about a certain device that is the millinery
and nonsense of this drill park, the globe
that is the mechanical toy of these laughing
girls. Now the whole company are whirling
round and round that giant school-globe that
looms like the dome of the Taj Mahal in the
center of the field. Upon the surface of the
sphere of hollow crystal, the map of the world
now begins to blaze out as darkness comes on,
the continents in the conventional colors of
the school globes from the beginning of the
log school house days. The interior of the
sphere is a vapor, the color of the sea, but becoming
iridescent as though the world were
but a bubble blown by the fancy of one of the
powers of the universe. The changes of light

274
are painted upon the faces of the riders and
the flanks of the horses.

July 17:—The Japanese is addressing the
leaders of the Horseshoe Brotherhood and the
Amazons. He says in conclusion:—“Hardly
a man on the earth wanted the war to come
that was waged against the World Government
thirty years ago, if we are to believe the
professions then made. So far as I can discover
not one responsible statesman expected
or intended it. Such dynamite may be touched
off again, and this time it will be with more
cause and more open anticipation. So though
the responsible ones like Michael and my
brother, if I may say so, are doing their best
to prevent war, half the world is drilling and
riding and marching, and flying about in
practice war planes, and even here where the
Great World’s Fair of the University of
Springfield is going on, that seems in itself an
assurance of international brotherhood forever,
you are drilling more zealously every
day.

“Pardon me, if for a moment I speak as
an old man to his grandchildren. I ask to
be forgiven if I am jealous of the furious and
romantic years just coming on, jealous for
the farther future, and for its vindication.
The immediate years, I know, will fill our

275
cups with sorrow whether we live or die. But
I ask of you one Spartan thing, beyond fighting
ten years—if ten years be necessary to
subdue mad Singapore. Remember not only
the virtues but the follies of your mothers,
the Amazons, and your fathers, the Horseshoe
Brotherhood, who rode side by side and
fought so nobly thirty years ago. I can speak
of this because I can say without flinching
that our Japanese men and women Samurai
went through the same glories and follies,
with them in the same battle line. Forever
after, they have lived in that war on that
battle line. Do not go on perpetually climbing
into office because you can recount military
history, as many of our Samurai have
done, drowning out the man or woman who
wants to speak of matters thirty years ahead
and plan such a thing as your Fair or University.
No war ushers in the perfect state. The
great wars are not all fought with the sword.
To speak in the Christian phrase, remember
that every yesterday is but a box of costly
spikenard to be broken on the feet of Holy
Tomorrow. Though you fight ten wars, let
yesterday be your enemy. Otherwise you fight
but as the nations that died before Confucius,
and Mencius.”

July 18:—The same group as on the 14th

276
of July are around the library table of St.
Friend with the addition of the gigantic
Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the Second, who is
among  us as though he were in his boyhood
again, being as he says, “Back home, after
so long.” The idolizing friendship of the
Japanese and his private secretary but provoke
him to franker monologues and a greater
disposition to sprawl about with his hair
mussed up and his head on one side like an
eagle acting the robin. He has his arm around
his son, as though he would push him in
amongst us. As the evening progresses, in
reply to some quite pointed questions from
the Japanese, on behalf of his brother and
himself, who want to act upon the information,
discreetly but definitely, Joseph Bartholdi
Michael, the Second, bawls out a confession:—

“First, let me say that no man ever held
office in the world, who was actually capable
of running more than a village of ten thousand
inhabitants. All men who have been
higher in apparent rank than village mayors,
have simply made shift: rattled about in their
big chairs as they could. The courageous
man, knowing this, respects, but does not
fear or revere the alleged great. They all get

277
the respect from me due to a good mayor, and
no more. No man should run for a great office
without expecting to make a botch of his administration.
I dream of something definite
and quite selfish. I want to have my turn as
President of the World Government. This
proclamation may be too much American
style for the stomachs of my Japanese friends
here present. But no one was ever elected dog
catcher, coroner, governor, senator, or president,
in this United States, who did not first
nominate himself. As a matter of fact I know
of no American politician who was ever urged
to run by his most admiring friend. I must
keep my American political habits if I am to
feel at home in this contest and to retain even
the American vote. All this is by the way. I
hope it is not too mysterious to a Japanese.

“To continue as to my views around and
about this office. A man may serve but one
term at best. We Michaels are a long lived
set, and I am hoping at the end of this war
to have strength for one term.

“It is a long journey to the nomination past
all other possible national or international
ambitions; for instance, in my case, past an
ambition to forge a thousand Michael blades.

“I admit I am an old man, and I know the
ironies, or at least some of them, if I win.

278
Whoever is President of the World or mayor
of a small town is predestined to be overthrown
by the ten most envious and vigorous
young men who want his place.”

And now the eagle begins to flame in the
face of Michael and he speaks most earnestly:
“I can only hope that some of the envious
will be from Springfield’s freshman chivalry.
I love the hate of young men and young
women when it is high and keeps them driving
forward to unseat the older generation
in tournaments over noble issues. And whoever
replaces me at the World Capitol,
either in the legislature or the supreme chair,
I hope to have made my bungling record
there of such a sort, my foe, equally human,
will be obliged to do his noblest to unseat me.
But the sword of the Michaels has not been
called the Avanel sword by divine accident
alone, and at the end of my turn, ten years
hence, or so, I am willing to be driven out of
the supreme-chair by a Boone, of Springfield,
particularly if it is a girl, and particularly if
she is named Avanel.” Which ending is of
course but gallant nonsense. But I venture,
from my dark corner to interrupt severely:—“The
world would have a princess, not a
president. It would simply be the reiteration
of monarchy and idolatry from of old time.”

279
But no one seems to hear me. My voice
comes from too far away.

July 21:—Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the
Second, is talking with the two Japanese and
myself in Tom Strong’s Lunch Room, and,
with most elaborate and knightly deference
to the extremely contrasting race character
of our guests, and is giving his theory of what
he calls:—“The New Springfield Race.” And
his tone of voice is most diplomatically ingratiating,
as he touches on matters alien to
Japanese thought.

“Just as the sea is naturally the world’s
buffer state, and in area far greater than the
total of all the continents, with the happy
circumstance that the World Government is
supported by a sea revenue, in this same way
and no other way, institutions like the University
Fair lie between all great enemies and
factions of Springfield, a sea of separation,
cooling, and reconciliation.

“Springfield, in other ways, affords so good
a symbol of desirable world conditions,
toward which the World Government should
be, perhaps, constructed, that I would like to
put the city before you in that light.

“What is the ultimate citizen of Springfield?
Already the race strains that have
mixed, have made an elastic, resilient type,

280
that is one with the city’s suddenest moves.

“Of course, one event or festival pleases
the Italians most, another seems to be in the
Scandinavian mood, though both events represent
Springfield. Every new song or event
or new idea goes echoing through the various
temperaments, and has a resonance that a
thought cannot have when it is echoed in only
one kind of a corridor.

“And Springfieldians, for all their marvelous
intermarriages, are not mongrel. They
have a special Springfield sense of the sacred
mystery of race, that keeps the great pronounced
race types like the Japanese and
others in honored separation, while within
one general type or kindred tradition, there is
much intermarriage.

“We Michaelites say to each other, and you
will forgive a family allusion, that the Springfield
soul, which is so elastic, is like the sword
evolved by the Iron Gentleman, which can be
coiled like a ribbon from the side but, when
cutting straightforward, can go through granite
without losing edge anywhere.

“As for the versatility and elasticity, the
Irish grandmother of my pet enemy will keep
him in city hall politics, and one Russian
great-grandmother keeps him in the music
department of the University, as one of the

281
leading composers. Or so we are accustomed
to tracing out family lines in this town.

“Another man is quite sure that his Portuguese
great-grandfather gives him the voice
to be one of the city’s principals in local
opera, and his Scotch great-grandfather, at
least in his own eyes, explains the fact that
he is an expert accountant.

“The mystery of race is first of all a sex
mystery, and with endless subtleties settled
by instinct, on which no man can dogmatize,
though they have caused jealous Othello to
misunderstand and kill Desdemona, and Jessica
to understand and wed Lorenzo, from
the beginning. If race is first of all a sex
mystery, it is next a religious mystery, which
is more easily expounded, from the standpoint
of politics, and touches, perhaps more clearly,
our theory of World Government. The prayers
at our family altars differ in tone and
accent. The races with a turn for sectarianism,
like the Scotch, are still working in
our blood while others are the mainstay of
the Cathedral. All phases of the race—the
religious mystery, moving in harmony,
cleanness, and self respect are not only a part
of Springfield’s total personality, but of
Springfield’s government, in the midst of apparent
mob-law.

282
“For instance, the fact that the Catholics
have remained for these one hundred
years worshipping in their incense-haunted
Churches in the Springfield atmosphere,
means that Springfield people, married before
Springfield Catholic altars, have become a
special kind of dreaming Catholics. Therefore,
they have given us miracle-working,
vision-seeing saints, like Saint Scribe of the
Shrines, to help unify our mood. And we all
worship in season at the Cathedral, and half
of us are followers of St. Friend, the Giver of
Bread, whatever our religious belief.

“I say the Christian Science Church of
Springfield has a most noble history. It is
made up largely of heretic Jews and proselytes
from the old Congregational New Englanders.
This would not be so if the doctrine
were a pure abstraction appealing to all men
equally. It is mixed in some incalculable way
with the mystery of race and the mystery of
the past, or it would not appeal so definitely
to these two race traditions, and so
little to all others.

“The side of it that appeals to me is its
history of freedom and its chronicle of subdivision,
which mean life, at least I hold that
they do in this case. And so we find the local
Mother Church growing at first strong, and

283
then new teachers rising in the body of the
Church’s life to make more vital the friendly
and hostile pulpits of the town, and stimulate
everywhere debate.

“The teachings of Rabbi Ezekiel of the
Oak Religion and Mother Grey of the Flower
Religion may be largely classified as coming
from Christian Science. The wave of its tide
is still strong among us, and we know not
what Christian Science may bring forth for
Springfield tomorrow.

“Our sects quarrel, of course, but whatever
quarrels they have divide families only, never
the city.

“I wish this could always be true of the
races in the World Government.

“We have seen adorers of the truth, like
close followers of Mother Grey, the Florist,
going from Synagogue to Church and from
Church to the Open Forum, and it is generally
deemed a mark of a good citizen, certainly
among the descendants of the Iron Gentleman,
to understand all of these movements,
and to love many, though they appear to contradict
one another. Within the dominion
of the Springfield mind, there is a principle:—one
sect, one vote: one race, one
vote. As florist Mother Grey is willing to say
to her most devoted following ‘Our religions

284
and races may be looked upon by the wise as
many flowers of opposite design, yet all making
glad the Springfield garden.’ Yet there is
no place in the world where people are more
loyal to their clans. Boones are Boones forever.

“You, as a Japanese, will be glad and comprehend
when I say that even the religious
life from the far east, except the teaching of
Singapore, moves up into this common denominator
in Springfield that we call citizenship.
There are a few Mohammedan Philippinos,
and I happen to know, they are good
citizens and good Americans, though they are
allowed but one apparent wife in these states.
There is a group of Thibetans, of whom the
Thibetan Boy is one socially, if not religiously,
who do not find a contradiction between
their Springfield patriotism that has
gone on these three generations, and their
reformed Buddhism. Of course, they marry
for the most part among themselves, or bring
Thibetans from New York or San Francisco
to build up their colony. Whatever church a
group of our people finds in tune with their
race and sex and love-tradition, no matter
how separate they keep their race strains, or
how guarded their family altars and holy family
flags, they surely belong to the Springfield

285
race and the Springfield Civic Religion.
They are loyal to the city as a scholar is to
his University. This is the mood I would like
to get into World-Government-Flag-Patriotism,
which is now too crude. With obvious
Singaporian exceptions, this Springfield civic
religion is preached by every philosopher and
every local atheist. Even Sparrow Short,
though he seems to hate me and the World
Government, would count it as great a hardship
to be banished from Springfield, as
Dante counted it, to be banished from Florence.
I wish his kind could see the World
Flag as they see the Springfield Flag.

“You have wanted to understand my politics,
to make it clearer to your brother in
Japan. In most things the city is a symbol
and pattern to me of World Unity and World
Government and if there has been any consistency
in my battles in the World Senate,
it is because I had faith in this pattern.

“Within the range from Jew to Greek we
openly trust one another’s priesthood, realizing
we are all kings and priests before God.
Above all races and their sects are the stars,
and beneath them is the rich earth, and between
these our city climbs heavenward. I am
sure that before a thousand years go by, yes,
before a hundred years go by, some image of

286
Prince Siddartha will stand beside the image
of Johnny Appleseed, whose soul was so much
like his own. Our image of Johnny Appleseed
would have been equally impossible in the
church of St. Peter and St. Paul that stood on
the site of our cathedral one hundred years
ago. With such practical unity of the main
forces that have quarrelled immemorially in
the old lands, I have the hope that similar
forces of race and sect, with the buffer state
of the ocean between them, to keep them cool,
may come to practical reconciliation under
the World Flag:—that those that can unite
under the Flag of Springfield with joy, can
some day unite, the world over, under the flag
of all mankind.” And so, till midnight Joseph
Bartholdi Michael, the Second, talks on and
on, possibly recruiting a member of his possible
cabinet, if his dream comes true, of being
for one term the President of the World.
And the Japanese Samurai nods his gray head
keeping time to the eloquence, till the one
remaining waiter gets us out of the restaurant
by turning down the lights, and handing
us our hats.

287

CHAPTER XVII

HOW IN THE LATTER PART OF JULY BLACK HAWK BOONE IS OPENLY LYNCHED AND JAMES KOPENSKY MYSTERIOUSLY STABBED ON THE SAME EVENING. HOW THREE MONTHS LATER THERE IS NO SIGN THAT EITHER MURDER WILL BE PUNISHED. HOW THE GOLDEN BOOK APPEARS ON THE MYSTIC DAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2018 AND HOW, WHEN IT COMES DOWN TO THE MOURNING AVANEL, SHE TAKES COURAGE AND LEADS HER PEOPLE AGAINST SINGAPORE, THAT WICKED NATION, THAT HAS DECLARED WAR ON THE WORLD FLAG.

July 22, 2018:—This morning owing to new
utterances on the part of Sparrow Short and
two others, more venomous than himself,
brothers of “Beau Nash,” he and they are
put into the International Prison for world
treason, with all further bail and bond refused.
Therefore tonight there is a great
torch-parade and ritual by St. Friend and
his followers in the cathedral. Debs, John
Brown, Lovejoy, Liebknecht, are invoked.
Springfield’s fury, glory, and devotion are in
every face and eye. St. Friend, with unaccustomed

288
fire for these his days of feebler health,
reviles the opinions of Short and his companions.
But he demands their liberation in
the name of the Constitution of the United
States and Free Speech. St. Friend cries from
the pulpit: “We preach not the low revolution,
but the high revolution, not the massacre
in the street, but the high unquenched torch
of freedom and free speech in the unconsumed
cathedral.”

The smoke of those torches comes between
me and St. Friend. Everything on this day
happens to me in such a fashion. There is
much dust on the dustless streets, at least
when I pass by. And many streets are unaccountably
deserted, morning and afternoon,
though there is a World’s Fair crowd roaring
somewhere near, I know. And the dust
that sweeps up with the autumn leaves from
these streets has the taste of old years in it,
and the grave. It seems, some moments, as
though I can keep my eyes open no longer. I
am not to take one step further. Some fate has
forbidden me to glimpse more of my City. But
there is that in my will and my soul that commands
me to go forward one step further,
and open my eyes for one moment longer.

And so through this evening I realize that,
dimly and dizzily, the torches are being uplifted

289
at the beginning of the star chiming
hour.

Now the great Joseph Bartholdi Michael,
the Second, is himself speaking in the cathedral,
and, if he testifies for old Sparrow
Short, who shall say that Short is a danger
to the World Flag?

Michael says that just as freedom resides
in the Declaration of Independence, in trial
by jury, and the like, which are immemorial,
crystallized institutions of the radicalism of
ancient times, so radicals with new thoughts
should have every chance with their torch
in the church and not be forced to wave it in
the street, and that “he is indeed glad this
meeting is being held in this place, etc., etc.”

July 23:—Sparrow Short is left locked up
and forgotten, for today there is a great
war-music in the streets.

All Singapore is running amuck. The
Horseshoe Brotherhood and the Amazons are
drilling double hours. Joseph Bartholdi Michael,
the Second, is firing his clan like an
Arab Mahdi, preaching a new holy war. A
new group of trumpeters are to the fore, blowing
slender trumpets, all of them silver white,
to frighten the Lord of Cocaine, trumpets
whose cry is that of birds that the Singaporians

290
hold accursed; the eagle, the turkey
and the wild swan.

And to that music, there at Camp Lincoln,
the maelstrom of cavalry goes on, round and
round their gigantic mechanical toy, their
simple childlike image of the earth, and its
glow is turning to a glare as of a smelter-furnace
door, or the blaze of a little planet,
newly whirled off from the sun.

July 24:—War talk dies down and the
whole town is full of hatred of its leaders and
feverish silly rumors against them. More and
more openly the small fry politicians of all
factions seem to be justifying with reminiscent
emphasis the lynching of Surto Hurdenburg
as an heroic act of defiance of both the
City Hall and the Board of Education. The
actual responsibility for the lynching is
shifted from this one to that one, but, whoever
it was that led (if we are to believe the tone
of the coffee houses) is a hero.

The fairly well-meaning leaders of the
town, comprising the majority of both the
Board of Education and the City Hall, are
in new tremendous offices, administering the
growing responsibilities of the World’s Fair
and the war preparations also, and a gulf has
been made between them and the people with

291
whom they have been on gossiping terms heretofore.

The old war between the town and the gown
seems revived, with this difference, that the
natives of Springfield act like the University
students, and the finest World’s Fair visitors
seem the real citizens of the place, insulted
at the deeds of the freshmen. The
habit of turning every spare village green
into a summer camp ground for passing tourists
in automobiles, that has prevailed through
the United States for a long time, has established
in all the counties adjoining Springfield
an enormous circle of village grounds,
and here the great part of the Fair visitors
camp by their own machines and come in to
the show by day, by local transportation of
all sorts. Their resentment of the frivolity of
the rank and file of the city grows, and
nightly they are the more appalled at the
rumor as they chatter in their camps, that
the Springfield mob intends to lynch wholesale
the only people who have treated the
Fair visitors with any degree of courtesy,
namely:—the City Council and the Board of
Education.

Whole streets of the city are suddenly deserted
and the business houses closed, for this
or that lightly given reason, and the next

292
hour that street, under obscure leaders may
be filled with a howling mob, that seems to be
howling about nothing.

The slander still persists, with infinite variations,
that the man who poisoned Drug Store
Smith and Coffee House Kusuko did it at
the direct instigation of old Boone. Such an
action is indeed far from Boone’s nature. And
this, all discredited leaders, in a panic for
their personal safety, steadily maintain.

July 25:—I am again the Malay servant at
the house of the Man from Singapore.

The death of Drug Store Smith and Coffee
House Kusuko was exacted of the Mayor’s
son by Montague Rock. It was an earnest of
the sincerity of his conversion to the Singaporian
cult. The Man from Singapore had
nothing to do with it and, in fact, does not
approve of the use of such a drastic initiation,
“But who can control these zealous proselytes,
these foreigners?” he says. The slandering
of Boone, it appears, by the talk of the
Man from Singapore with his daughter, is
also the work of this fanatical convert,
Montague Rock. It is not exactly the Singaporian
way. But again “who can control
these foreigners?”

July 26:—About the beginning of July,
four men come to town, who took part in

293
the burning alive of a negro in Chicago.
The burning was provoked by a yellow journal’s
account, giving hear-say evidence
against the negro. Disturbing their minds not
at all over the subsequent vindication of the
black man, his executioners come to Springfield,
intoxicated with their recent leadership,
the first taste of public power they have ever
known, the smell of burning flesh delighting
their cannibal nostrils. They take odd jobs
from Boone and profess to be his violent
partizans. They are more violent than he
desires or uses.

And so tonight, while I am chained in the
body of the Malay body-servant, the news
comes over the phone, particularly grieving
the Man from Singapore, that Boone has been
hanged from the same tree at the northwest
corner of the State House ground, where
Surto Hurdenburg was hanged on the twentieth
of June. The four men from Chicago,
who lead the mob, want to burn Boone to
death, but the rest of the crowd insist on a
hanging. The crowd is not composed of partizans
of the City Hall. There are few people
who were at the murder of Hurdenburg; according
to the report over the phone, equally
obscure members of all factions are represented.

294
The Man from Singapore says he deeply
regrets the death of Boone who was an honorable
and open foe of Singapore. He almost
weeps before the beautiful Mara and, as to
what she thinks, I know not. He says that if
he had had his way, Boone should have lived
several years longer, but the fashions, even
of proselytes in Springfield, are past finding
out. “They are WHITE people, you know,”
he says to Mara, “even if they are converted.”

Then he is gone to his writing room in the
white tower of his house, and Mara sits waiting
for Crawling Jim, who is due later this
evening.

And here let it be recorded that, the Singaporian
issue becoming more bitter, the towers
of Springfield and all the principal cities of
the United States have been painted white
this last month, to drive out the more fanatical
Singaporians. In complete harmony
with this hysterical and fantastic and humorous
procedure, Crawling Jim has been under
the necessity of wearing a small white plume
in his hat, or resigning his place as President
of the Robin Redbreast Flying Club. Nothing
is said among the members. Plumes begin
to appear one at a time. Soon a majority have
them. Jim put on his plume late yesterday.

295
He values his supremacy in that flying club
more than any victory in love or any dogma
of religion.

But having had a part in the Judas tricks
which have ended in the hanging of Boone,
he knocks most confidently on the door tonight,
when it is almost midnight, and I let
him in. He carries in his hand the hat with
the white plume.

He walks into the book-room most jauntily.
There the deep eyed Mara awaits him with
love. She is nestled among her books, just
below her mother’s languid picture. She
lifts slow eyes that are heavy with love. But
she sees that white plume. And Jim has little
time left in life to have the Malay nature explained
to him, the brief tale of how they may
run “amuck” without reason.

Mara cannot wait. Her dagger is out, and
she is indeed running “amuck.” They reach
the hall together, and she stabs him before
the eyes of the green Glass Buddha. She
stands stark and lonely above him, and
screams for her father to come down from
his writing room.

October 29:—The body of Crawling Jim
was found in a shadow, near the tree where

296
Boone was hanged, by the group of young
Boones who came to take away the body of
their kinsman.

No one is in serious peril of being brought
to justice for the death of Boone, though
that was three months and three days ago.
This has always been the case, in Springfield
lynchings and murders. It is a thing still
taken for granted, as people look drearily in
the direction of the courts. The weekly magazines
in Coe’s Book Store, from all over the
country, roar about the two unavenged and
unspeakable Springfield murders:—of the
leading editor, and the son of the mayor on
the same night. This has been in the papers,
on similar occasions, for a century. And curiously
enough, the town is blazing with international
courage and all tense with efficiency
on international issues. We are more in despair
of bringing some sixty or one hundred
masked murderers to justice than of annihilating
the whole nation and religion of
Singapore on the other side of the world. And
there is, I admit, some justification for our
hope. America, paralyzed one minute, is like
a million bolts of lightning the next. There
is something of the essence of majority rule
in this, if one might think it out. But to our
story.

297
Singapore is about to proclaim an all-Asiatic
alliance against the World Government,
with the ostensible object of an ultimate Pacific
Ocean Government, living in alleged
reciprocity and amity with the World Government,
but not under one jurisdiction. Their
newspaper editorials, sent by cable, sound
marvelously like the fulminations of South
Carolina in the days of Andrew Jackson, and
further fulminations in the days just before
the Civil War.

Indo China joins the Singaporian league,
Burmah, and certain provinces of Southern
China. But most of the Asiatic continent and
all of Japan remains actively loyal to the
Flag of Joseph’s Coat. On the other hand
there are strange hesitancies in Europe and
South America. There are rumors of World
Treason, even among American officials of the
World Government. Today the Singaporian
declaration hangs.

I find myself again with the Japanese and
his secretary on the reviewing stand by
the wrought iron gates of Camp Lincoln, as
the Amazons once more whirl by. They are
valiant and potent as Britomart, and the Japanese
Samurai says “it is inconceivable that
such creatures could let a mob run away with
their town, if such things had not happened

298
hundreds of times in the history of noble
cities.”

I find a wan new hope pouring into my
dusty veins as they pass us many thousand
strong, riding the best bred, the best shod
horses in the whole wide world, and flashing
the finest swords ever made. And along with
the swords, the eyes of the horses flash as
though they themselves were shouting the
song of the warrior maidens. It is the old
song, sung now with terrible irony and
sweetness: “Springfield Awake, Springfield
Aflame.” And then there are strains of that
World Government song, beginning: “Every
ship of every land, every wheel and every
wing.”

The cheeks of the girls are sun-browned,
and rosy as the Amaranth-Apples in the orchards
of Hunter Kelly.

The whole town is here; every faction,
religion, tribe and tongue. Besides all the
Michaels, Boones and Darsies, Bonansingas,
Romanoffs, Fagins, Kopenskys, Rocks, Rues,
Swartzes, McGinnisses, Ezekiels, Greys, there
are even girls of the negro Timmons and Emis
families. There are Hymans, Stanleys and
Radleys, and all the rest. Each steed is like a
pale horse of death. I am thinking that when
human beings go forward like this, trained to

299
the last inch, all whipcord and tempered steel,
it is no wonder that, left far behind, to make
mischief, there are human embers. This must
be paid for, by the discarded creatures among
us who cannot stand this pace and who are not
quite vile enough in ordinary hours to be hid
in jails or sanitariums, but who when their
little time suddenly arrives, go forth marauding
according to their nature and their good
luck.

I am beneath the reviewing platform and,
as I am meditating, the mayor’s little sister
stands up in her stirrups and cuts me across
the face with her whip, not checking her pace
an instant. Some one behind and above me
says: “Evidently you did not see the flags.”
It is the Japanese, all courtesy and solicitude.
But he has been fortunate enough to see in
time and to salute the meteors just ahead of
this fiery little rider, the two battle flags of
the Amazons, the Star Spangled Banner and
the thousand-colored flag that will yet redeem
mankind, made of all the flags in the world,
sewed into one glorious banner, the Flag of
Joseph’s Coat.

But I have my excuse for not seeing the
flags of my world. My eyes have been dazzled
by Avanel, who has been mourning and hidden
three months and three days; she is riding

300
in from a boulevard to the left, hurrying
with her escort to the head of the cavalcade.

The meaning of her accoutrement is plain.
She is saying, by what she wears: “No Singapore
intrigue can drive the child of Daniel
Boone from her destiny.” Never was she such
a commander as she is in this twilight, with

black horse, black gauntlets, black dress,
black harness, black plume, all things black

and the only flash of white, her mourning
face. Her pride is laid low for a higher pride.
For the first time her black hair is combed
back over her shoulders, after the manner and
regulation of the Boones, and she goes forward
to resume her command, and the girls
cry out in passionate welcome, and there is a
terrible mourning and a terrible menace in
their cry, when she takes her left hand from
the gauntlet, and it is dyed crimson, after the
manner and regulation of the Boones.

October 30.—The Amazons of the city, and
the Horseshoe Brotherhood have taken possession
of the city, and until the day of their
going, they will police the city and none shall
hinder them, and they ride down the boulevards
with little consideration or patience
for the loitering of passers by. More and more
the Avanel blades hiss in the air, and there is
angry fear in the eyes of the women, that the

301
mobs may again own these streets, while the
city’s warriors are away in Asia. And this
evening
The Boone Ax
, of which Avanel is
now the nominal editor, comes out with an
editorial, front page, with her signature:—“I
have railed in my time at middle-class respectability.
Yet
The Boone Ax
trusts it today as
the one jewel case containing most of the
gems of brotherhood. Whatever its policy in
the past
The Boone Ax
now puts at the head
of its regular inside editorial page a picture
of Confucius, and under it this description:—‘The
champion of old-fashioned, middle-class
decency and respectability, and the lawgiver
for this paper.’

“The picture goes there as our only vengeance
for the death of the founder of this
paper, and as our eternal reminder of that
act.

“As a matter of getting down to the bed
rock of civilization we turn to the world’s
most ancient champion of propriety and civility
and fight lynch law and all popular and
ill-considered whirlwinds, until our paper has
won its battle, or is wiped from the face of
the earth.”

November 1, 2018:—But Confucius is not
the patron saint of the lady Avanel.

It all comes as a clouded vision before me

302
as though I were half in the vision, and
through it beginning a new and more desperate
destiny of my own. It is the snowy morning
of All Saints’ Day. Representatives of the
Michael Clan, young and old, Horseshoe
Brotherhood, Amazons and many others are
at the crossing of Fifth Street and Capital
Avenue, by the ancestral Blacksmith Shop.
The horse of the conquering Avanel Boone is
to be shod by that good sport, Joseph Bartholdi
Michael, the Second, as a sign of fealty,
and in final preparation for the going forth
against Singapore. Scattered among the
Michaels are the long-haired, black-haired
Boones, with the locks of both the men and
women streaming back over their shoulders,
after the manner and regulation of the
Boones, and their left hands dyed crimson, as
a perpetual reminder to themselves and all
the world of certain strains of Red Indian
ancestry.

While the snow is blowing into the shop,
white-haired Joseph Bartholdi Michael, the
Second, aided by his son, the Third, have
taken the old shoes from the dainty feet
of the white pony, and just as the old warrior
is lifting a new shoe from the fire, the
flames leap up, there is a music incredibly
sweet and, with a great whirring of wings

303
and terrible thunder, the Golden Book flies
out of the fire and circles above these two
clans and their satellites of renown.

And the swords of the Amazons are out in
the air in involuntary salutation, and the face
of Avanel has the consecration of a nun, taking
her final vows. I wonder if all her girlish
escort, so wonderstricken, see, as I see. For
to me, as I feel my feet sinking into the dust of
the ancient grave, this horse and rider move
heavenward a little, it seems as though
Avanel’s horse’s hoofs no longer quite touch
the ground; she is a sort of celestial lady
centaur. She and her horse have one pair of
wings that bind them together, and the wings
are rays of light and the same color as the
wings of the book and akin. And even while
I look, the very glory of this vision of a young
girl, receiving her commission from the unseen
world, burns me down like the last
embers of a campfire blown upon by a terrible
wind from the skies. I am neither man
nor weed nor flame any more but something
less than these and doomed by the years.
There is a flower of flame above her forehead
that consumes my eyes; there are flowers of
flame above the foreheads of all her girl companions.

Avanel, with eyes fixed and strained, follows

304
the flying book on her winged horse. The
book settles into her arms and, though the
snow and autumn leaves swirl down and
blind me, I see her there above the company,
like a fairy in a trance, while the assembled
clans and all the citizens gather close to hear
every word. The first pages of the volume
give a new constitution for the World Government,
based on the teachings of Abraham Lincoln.
The song in the air praises Avanel and
urges her and all she commands to valor for
the Heavenly Star Spangled Banner and the
Heavenly International Flag.

But as for myself, I am sinking to my knees
into yesterday, and this is not Fifth and Capital
Avenue, for me, for the wind says: “ashes
to ashes, dust to dust.” Then Avanel leans
down. She gives her crimson hand to me one
moment. She gives me life for this war. This
is the day of going forth against Singapore.

305

CHAPTER XVIII

HOW SEVEN YEARS AFTER THE MYSTIC YEAR ST. FRIEND AND AVANEL READ FROM A COPY OF THE GOLDEN BOOK AND HOW HE TELLS HIS VISION THAT CAME THE DAY THE BOOK FIRST APPEARED. ON OTHER DAYS THE LADY AVANEL SOWS THE THISTLE OF DREAMS AND THE APPLE AMARANTH SEEDS AND THE ACORNS OF EZEKIEL AND THE SEEDS OF THE GOLDEN RAIN TREE AND THEREBY COME NEW VISIONS AND TEACHINGS AND MAGIC WORKS.

Of the Singapore adventure, there is a song
to be sung, some day, but we cannot, by taking
thought, sing of battles. The song of
battle comes when we least expect it, long
after or long before the event that is so moving
to the heart.

But Singapore is indeed overthrown and
for two seasons the young men and maidens
have been back from the Asiatic war front.
To some of them, to many, The Golden Book
came before they left Springfield. To others
it appeared after the last battle, hovering
above the trenches at midnight and there
were songs in the air calling them home. Or

306
they found it suddenly in their hands in camp
shelters, and long litanies and proclamations
of the New Springfield and the New Earth
flashed upon their souls and burned eternal
record there.

It is a gorgeous first of March afternoon
and the wind has abated for a few hours, and
a few buds are out in Washington Park and
we are hoping that frost will not nip them in
this exceedingly premature spring. The lotus
pond is still empty and leaden. It flowers only
in the height of July but we look to it in
hope and with remembrance of other lotus
days.

Avanel and I and St. Friend are in the
Washington Park Pavilion. The precocious
spring is in the blood of the ancient saint. He
is the youngest of us, the gayest. Avanel is
speaking of that morning in front of the
blacksmith shop when the great Book fluttered
into her arms. “In the fire flaming from
the words of that book, I found power to go
out and fight for the International Flag, and
make that the vengeance for the death of my
father.”

Now I draw from my coat pocket a tiny
duplicate of the book, such as is now in the
hands of practically every Springfield citizen,
printed by Josephine Windom and Horace

307
Andrews. As we three loaf in the pavilion:
St. Friend, Avanel and myself, and look
at the leaden lotus pond, St. Friend reads
aloud the familiar opening sentences of St.
Scribe of the Shrines, who wrote the book
in Heaven:—

“I have been long in the jungles of the
Celestial Zion, speculating on how the ruined
mansions here, and how the earth itself, might
be rebuilt. Yet the true Heaven lies in a
single flower, and more and more my speculations
turn on how my own city, Springfield,
may be rebuilt.”

Then St. Friend, the Giver of Bread, at our
urging, reads on and on. The volume tells,
for instance, how Heaven became a jungle
within the lifetime of an ordinary man. The
book contains a sermon, which our saint reads
to us, on: “Your great great grandson’s
neighbors.” It is a volume no more consecutive
than the Koran. Each dream is written
down once for all as it came to the tranced
soul of St. Scribe, as he bent over the page,
with his terrible pen in his hand.

With endless reiteration the book denounces
the diabolical works of the Singaporian
sect and their conspiring against
world peace. It pronounces a blessing on the
predestined victorious armies of the World

308
Government and prophecies the triumph of
their splendid flag.

Moreover, St. Friend reads, not only many
of these things, but the sermon on “The
Rhythm of the Heart,” and the homily upon
“The Good and Evil of Beauty.” He reads
the exhortation for “The Young Musician
who has not learned to Pray,” and the one
for “The Young Politician who has not
learned to Pray,” and like discourses for
many other occupations.

And then Avanel and I take turns reading
on and on to him through the specific directions
for the founding of the schools of the
Young Prophets, and the discourse on the
horror of the angels at all the World Wars,
and the tale of how the angels went out to redeem
the stars from war by surrendering
themselves to crucifixion on millions of
crosses on millions of suns and stars and
planets, and thus within the lifetime of the
generation now on earth, Heaven was left a
jungle. This is followed by an exhortation
to make Springfield a city “worthy of the
blood of the crucified poured down upon it.”

But its powers are not directly in its interminable
discourses. Always it seems to be a
person, not a book, and so, on this afternoon.

309
April 10, 2025:—Again it is a goodly afternoon,
and we are still hopeful for these precocious
buds. As we sit in the sun in the
Washington Park Pavilion, Saint Friend, the
Giver of Bread, tells us of the visions that
came seven years ago.

“I remember the Halloween of 2018, and
the next few days, as no other period in my
life. I was in the Cathedral all the night,
praying before the Image of St. Scribe of the
Shrines. And toward morning it took on the
appearance of breathing human flesh, but was
Hunter Kelly of long ago, in the hunter’s cap
and deerskin dress, such as he wore when he
came to Illinois two centuries ago.”

And so Hunter Kelly, St. Scribe of the
Shrines, made me forget all else, telling me
stories of the tomorrow of Illinois and giving
clear prophecies of the tomorrow of the Cathedral,
in the city and the nation and the world.
He spoke of saints of the pattern of Abraham
Lincoln, and Johnny Appleseed, foreordained
to live and breathe beneath our Cathedral
roof, before the ever living presence on the
altar. Then he gave me the joy of confession,
and seemed to be St. Scribe, the master of my
youth. Then all was darkness and sleep.

“In the early morning I woke from my

310
trance and found myself lying on the floor of
the Cathedral. The Image of Hunter Kelly-St.
Scribe was gone from the niche.

“In the late morning, when I found myself
reading his Golden Book to the people, it
seemed as though I had known its every word
for infinite years.

“I read on and on. When I closed the book
and dismissed the people, they went out singing
through the streets ‘Springfield Awake,
Springfield Aflame.’

“As I stood alone in the church, a vision of
the war came to me.

“The angel of the Cathedral came down
from the carved niche near the roof. By many
signs she was, indeed, the angel of Illinois.
The stone was transformed into a presence,
delicate as the milkweed silk, ruddy as the
sunrise. Her hair was the hue of red corn.
Her wind blown mantle was the color of ripe
wheat. Her wings were like those of the white
eagle. Her eyes were dark as the deep-digged
mine. Her smile was the beginning of visions.

“Circling her temple was an opalescent
crown, twenty white stars, with the twenty-first
over the forehead, with the red blood of
Hunter Kelly in the heart’s core of it.

“Above her head appeared a great hand,
swinging a censer through the roof and

311
walls of the building. The Angel of the Cathedral
said to me, as she stood beside me:—‘This
is the Censer of Change. A great
change is coming to Illinois and the Capital
of Illinois.’

“The smoke poured out and filled the
streets. It penetrated every grove of Springfield.
It beat in the blood of every living creature.

“The Angel of Illinois said:—‘This is the
Incense of Civic Genius. The city shall be
barren no longer but bring forth.’

“Then through the roof, as though there
were a censer higher than the first, clouds of
many colors descended. These became gorgeous
cloud-winged children in wonderful,
gleaming silks, flying through the walls. And
in the same stream Gothic grotesques walked
and crawled down the aisles and out into the
streets, all singing: ‘Springfield Awake,
Springfield Aflame.’

“The angel of the Cathedral said: ‘These
are the children of the New Time and their
playmates, the beasts of Innocent Fancy.’

“Then the dusty stone cherubim and seraphim
that stood by the pillars of the church,
with their dusty cold trumpets, took on life.
They blew a long awakening cry. Every note
was a delicate and heart-shaking surprise.

312
Then from above the high altar, from a fire
which burned round the Host on the altar,
there came soldiers of Heaven, in very ancient
armor, but with newly pierced hands.

“The Angel of the Cathedral, the Angel
of Illinois, said: ‘These are they who shall
live invisibly by every hearth and table
throughout the Capital.’

“There burst from the pavement smoke
and dust and stones, and from there arose
the great glass image of the cocaine Buddha.
Immobile as any other stone, he was yet
carried by invisible hands. He and his
company rushed with a great whistling
like the hissing of serpents. They went out
through the walls into the streets as though
the walls were nothing. They had many kinds
of monsters with them, and strangely singing
birds of paradise, and lions with poison quills.

“The Angel of Illinois said to me: ‘This
glass image will turn to dust.’ Yet for every
angel at a hearth of the city there will be a
demon, a quilled lion, and a singing bird of
paradise. These will eat invisibly at your
tables and hearths, feeding upon the words
and thoughts of the household. They will
breathe hell’s breath into the faces of the
children. But the Angel Soldiers of Heaven

313
who have marched from out the High Altar
will be with the people also.

“These powers will be in perpetual truce
and perpetual war in every house in the Capital.
But open war between nations and races
of men will soon be ended forever.

“These lions have crept and ramped
through the dark valleys of Heaven and they
have the seeds of sweet flowers clinging to
their feet and these singing birds of paradise
have flown through the dark trees of heaven,
and have the seeds of rare trees clinging to
their pinions.

“These censers that have swung over the
raw capital, will swing over many another
this day, and the angel soldiers will appear in
many another city around the world, and by
many a far off hearthstone and family and
tribal table, with their demon foes beside
them, in perpetual truce, and perpetual war.”

May 15:—The premature, precocious buds
and green twigs of the year are surviving this
perilous spring. There are showers and carpets
of every kind of blossom. It seems more
like June fifteenth than May fifteenth. Beautiful
people, mothers and children, boys and
girls, in the lightest and whitest of summer
masquerading costumes are walking and
dancing over the whitest, cleanest streets our

314
city has ever known. But the Lady Avanel
and I confess to one another, as of old, that
these days are not the millennium, however
gay they seem to be.

And yet my lady, this evening, becomes a
thing not quite of this earth, a spirit, yet a
sower in earthly fields.

I whisper: “Lady Avanel, Miss Fantastic,
while the star chimes are ringing another
new tune, what are you sowing from your
close-woven willow basket so full of seed?”
The lady speaks with the voice of the wind:—“I
am sowing the torturing thistle of dreams.
Some men do not see this city as it is, because
they have walked in easy and stupid ways.
They have never walked, as we do this evening,
while the Thistle of Dreams comes up. We
see it springing from the ground in an instant.
It will go in an hour. But if we touch it we
are blessed and tormented forever by newer
and newer dreams. And at last our eyes will
see this city as it is, a weed patch indeed, but
of fancies. And more than a weed patch of
fancies,—a forest, but of gigantic dreams.

“The men who can see the dreams build
the patterns into visible forms, and then we
have the Sunset Towers, and the Truth
Tower, and the Street of Past History, and
the rest.

315
“Then I walk past these buildings and sow
new thistle-down and thistles, and they
penetrate the very concrete of the sidewalk,
splitting it for their roots. Then younger men
and women are stung with new visions, that
make the Sunset Towers seem commonplace,
and all but the Springfield Flag, the Star
Spangled Banner, and the World Flag, dim
things.”

The Thistle of Dreams is growing around
Avanel as she speaks. It looks like a gigantic
fleur de lis, but from it comes endless silk as
though from the pods of the milkweed. She
says of that silk: “It is full of thorns sharper
than Cupid’s arrows, more transforming than
any drug from Asia. They work their way to
many a heart and brain. When the young citizens
are tormented by these they will build
things greater than Springfield has yet looked
upon, people’s palaces, as yet without a
name.”

“And who are you, Lady Avanel, and by
what authority do you speak?”

“I am only the breath of the prairie, I am
only the West-going Heart, and by that
authority I speak to you, and by that authority
I sow the thistle.”

“Lady Avanel, Miss Fantastic, while the
star chimes are ringing another new tune,

316
what are you sowing from your close woven
willow basket, so full of seed?”

“I am sowing the appleseeds of Johnny
Appleseed and Hunter Kelly and the Acorns
of Rabbi Terence Ezekiel and the seeds of
the Golden Rain Tree of New Harmony. But
they are now breathed on by the winds of
chaos and their glory comes suddenly.”

At once in her path appear saplings, then
they become full grown trees. And there are
many earthquakes, as the boughs begin, this
very midnight, to bear flowers and fruit.
Then come up from the roots explosive
scraps of earth and volcano coals. Treasure
sacks of strange jewels, neither scorched nor
smoked, are tossed to the surface of the
ground. These sacks are full of coins of
celestial gold, stamped with a picture of
Hunter Kelly, as though he were a President
or an Emperor of some strange dominion.

From each heap of celestial gold come two
or three bright spirits with wreaths of tiny
leaves or flowers round their baby foreheads,
weeping angels, an hour old, little boys, most
sturdy and kicking.

And now angels will come to bear them to
the houses of the laughing people. Citizens
who are not at home will find them later
on the table, and in the wood box and in the

317
waste-basket, strange little visitors and
sons.

“Lady Avanel, Miss Fantastic, what of
these children from the sod?”

The lady answers: “These are the laughter
of earth and heaven.

“These children will grow in stature and
beauty for twenty years. And then these little
sons of God will see the daughters of men,
that they are fair, as it was in the book of
Genesis, at the very beginning of time. The
next generation of men in Springfield, born of
the loves of these angels and daughters of the
city, will be giants like Nimrod. These giants
will drive out the former institutions with
their own swords, forged for this special
war. That generation will build many mansions
of divine beauty, sheltering men and
near-angels alike. And the houses of magical
or heavenly aspect will mix with the plain,
grimy or earthen houses:—for the generations
of Springfield will be forever a mixed
breed.”

318

CHAPTER XIX

HOW AT THE END OF ALL THESE WORKS AND DAYS, AVANEL AND I RISE IN A BOAT THROUGH THE AIR, FOLLOWING THE GREAT NEW AMARANTH VINE FROM CAMP LINCOLN TO THE PARAPETS OF HEAVEN. HOW WE TRACE ITS BANYAN-LIKE BRANCHES THROUGH THE JUNGLES OF HEAVEN, AND HOW WE DEFY THE HANDSOME MEDICINE MAN, DEVIL’S GOLD, AND HOW, LATER, WE FIND THE EMPTY SACK OF JOHNNY APPLESEED. HOW I RETURN TO FIFTH AND MONROE AND AVANEL IS ONE HUNDRED YEARS AWAY.

It is many years after the triumphant return
of the Amazons and the Horseshoe
Brotherhood from the battles in Asia. Avanel
and I are walking again along the Great
Northwest Road, and we reach the Old Camp
Lincoln grounds where the Horseshoe Brotherhood
and the Amazons so often drill. But
this evening it is deserted, with neither tent
nor horse nor rider to be seen. It is autumn
and leaves whirl between me and the Lady
Avanel and too often hide her from me. Many
leaders of various sects of the city are moving

319
about or assembled. It has always been
the holy region of the city, near the Gardens
of the Flower Religions and the Grave of Lincoln
and of Hunter Kelly.

Avanel and I are in the spirit on this evening.
We walk, as though upon carpets of
glory, and we hear from the black lips of the
humble earth the cry: “Springfield Awake,
Springfield Aflame.”

The old giant toy globe, that used to be in
the center of this field, is long gone. And
where it stood, there has come up, since The
Golden Book appeared, a great Apple-Amaranth
Vine, coming as it were, like Jack’s beanstalk,
suddenly.

It is autumn and the whole air is fragrant
with the honey of the fruit of this Apple-Amaranth,
and bees are busy with the rich
fruit.

Every highest, furtherest bud that opens
day after tomorrow, or in a thousand years,
will flash with a spark and a flame, that has
climbed up hundreds and thousands of miles
from the roots that touch all the gardens of
our city, up the old streets of Heaven, where
this vine blooms today.

In the twinkling of an eye, while the star
chimes of Springfield are ringing new tunes,
from the dimmest stars of the blue, from east,

320
west, north and south, magic boats sweep
down to the Amazonian field.

It is happiness to be even the oldest of the
prophets, who wait exhausted, after ages of
service, praying and dreaming, stretched out
on the decks of their swift boats, consumed
with beautiful sorrow and hope. The honey
of each different Amaranth, growing through
the stars, has burnt all the strength of their
bodies away, yet it gives to them stronger
courage, hour by hour. When it touches their
lips, all else is vanity. It is the live coal from
the altar and is their new Heaven.

The boats are now above the field, and some
of them have rested near the earth, and some
of the prophets are standing round the tree.
Among them is that wild ancient man Isaiah.
He gathers the whole company of Springfield
people who are there on the edges of the
field. Then there join, from the invisible
world, many of the long dead Saints of
Springfield and many saints from other capitals
of this land.

Isaiah speaks to us in words, such as he
spoke to the Jews, when the earthly Jerusalem
had fallen, but they are words that
shall ever be new till the last millennium is
achieved. He stretches forth his hand and
blesses our kneeling company and, with the

321
honey of this new Amaranth Flower still
burning on his lips, like visible fire, he cries
in a loud voice his old prophecies of the coming
of the restored and redeemed Zion.

Avanel and I are now in our ship above
the town, and looking down on the sea of dim
fleets. Avanel whispers: “There are prophets
in those boats from all the hermit caves
and all the shrines in the moon and all the
planets and all the suns. There are prophets
that once walked the innermost streets of the
far jungles of Heaven.

“Yet the song that comes up from that sea
and shakes our sails is: ‘Springfield Awake,
Springfield Aflame,’ because the song and
heart and blood of any prophet are for the
city that will receive them.”

The boats are ranged in three great circles
beneath us round the new Amaranth Vine.
These ride on invisible sea-levels. They are
not air ships with modern wings and propellers,
but boats of the ancient type, such as
were used by Hiram, King of Tyre, when he
brought the wood to build the temple of Solomon,
such as St. Peter used on Lake Galilee,
such as bore St. Paul to the ends of the world.

While the star chimes of the city ring new
tunes, the weird sailors below us pour down
a crimson wine from the sides of the boats,

322
that mixes with the autumn leaves of the
Amaranth Vine that swirl now between us
and the whole towered city below. The wine
and the leaves turn to crimson mist and crimson
storm, filling the city canyons with rolling
rivers of storm to the top of the Sunset
Towers.

The boats rise, sailing as though travelling
of their own knowledge. Even those that are
empty and have no prophet sailors in them
are up and away. Some of them seem like exhalations
from the perfume and gleam of the
gigantic vine or from the light and mist of the
city below. And so out to the stars scatter
all these purposeful ships, some empty, some
with prophet crews, and every boat has blazing
at its masthead the red and white star of
Springfield and Illinois.

And the song goes up with them to the
stars: “Springfield Awake, Springfield
Aflame.” Avanel says, “That song comes because
the song and heart and blood of the
proudest prophets from the proudest suns,
are for the city that will receive them.”

We let our ship blow and drift as it will.
But it sweeps up and up, with the swiftness
of light. In less time than it takes a flower to
open, we are carried to the parapets of ancient
Heaven. We find our great-leaved, heavy-fruited

323
Amaranth Vine, climbing up over the
closed gates and high wall-towers of Heaven
and winding a long way into the old forest
that has overgrown the streets. We find the
new all conquering Springfield vine, spreading
branches through the forest like a banyan
tree.

As this Amaranth from our little earthly
village grows thicker, we see by its light a bit
of what the ancient Heaven has been. And it
is still a solid place of soil and rock and metal.
Where the Springfield Amaranth blooms
thickest, shedding luminous glory from the
petals in the starlight, this Heaven is shown
to be an autumn forest, yet with the cedars
of Lebanon, and sandalwood thickets, and the
million tropic trees whose seeds have blown
here from strange zones of the planets, and
whose patterns are not the patterns of those
of our world. Among these, vine-clad pillars
and walls are still standing, roofed palaces, so
gigantic that, when our boat glides down the
great streets between them, they overhang
our masts.

And from branches above us these strange
manners of fruits tumble upon our decks for
our feasting and delight. And there are beneath
our ship, as it sails on as it will, little

324
fields long cleared in the forest, where grows
weedy ungathered grain.

Through hours and hours of the night our
boat goes on, whether we will or no, through
starlight and through storm-clouds and
through flower-light. And the red star at the
masthead and the sight of the proud face of
Avanel keeps laughter in my bosom, and the
heavenly breeze that blows on the flowers
still sings to our hearts: “Springfield Awake,
Springfield Aflame.”

Out of the storm now, three great rocks
appear, giving forth white light there on the
far horizon, and this light burns on and on.
At last our ship approaches. We see the great
rocks are three empty thrones.

These are the thrones of the Trinity, empty
for these many years, just as the Ark of the
Covenant and the Holy of Holies were bereft
of the Presence, when Israel sinned.

And now we are near, and see that the
light that hangs round these mountain
thrones is because of the vines of gigantic
Amaranths, of strange design and of many
colors, that bloom upon them. These vines
have journeyed up through the ether and
great spaces from many cities and many stars.

Our boat sweeps to the side of the thrones,
and we look down on what was once the

325
crystal sea, a wild green water now, with
great fleets of idle boats, moored by its
marshy banks, the boats of dead prophets
and angels who lie turned to stone on their
strange and beautiful decks. “These are the
souls who sinned by refusing to enlist in the
crusade against world wars,” or, at least, so
Avanel tells me from her heart.

And this is all her dream, none of it mine,
and without her all this is nothing.

There are boats of the older days, galleons
of rotted magnificence, wrecked and high and
dry upon the sand bars, and the skeletons
and driftwood of boats are scattered in the
marshes by long forgotten storms and cyclones.

We disembark and tread our perilous
way among these strange appearances.
Sometimes they are as seemingly material
as earth. Sometimes we are but walking on
the dust of nebulae.

Then we walk into the vine-clad forest
that covers the pass between the nearest
throne mountains, where broken steps are
still to be found in the moss, and whisper
to us to follow. There are many butterflies
and bees that have taken too much of the
blood of the fruit of the Amaranth Flower
and are fallen down and some of them dead.

326
The stair leads us up and through a dark
pass and down into a deeper twilight. And
the stair, slowly descending, whispers to us:
“Follow.” And thus we go, into the most
abysmal and curious of valleys, whence, perhaps,
ages ago, many spirits fled affrighted
because of the loneliness.

We walk amid rich ruins, miles and miles
of vaulted halls, deep sheltered recesses,
heaped with the purple dust of dead tapestries,
mouldering porticos shaken by the
wind. Avanel, fearing not, follows the steps
that still call: “Follow, follow.” She is eating
of the Amaranth that still blooms and
bears fruit, eating the fruit from many stars,
breathing strange perfume, humming her old
songs and new songs, with heart aflame, a
dauntless prophetess, prodigal and guide.

But now even her spirit is weary and her
soul has earth thoughts again, as we wander
through the echoing throne rooms. She tries
in vain to laugh in the desolate halls. In a
fever and a fret and in unutterable, earthly
weariness, we shuffle amid heaps of old shields
of blackened silver, amid helmets of brass
and iron, amid ivory chariots and rotted
harps and broken crowns and swords of
rusted gold. And then we see a campfire
we know and smell the familiar fragrance of

327
pine wood and, in the crossing of two tremendous
grass grown streets, we find him we
found, first in a dream in springtime, and
then at midsummer midnight of a far off
June at Fifth and Monroe. The Handsome
Medicine Man, Devil’s Gold, is saying to us,
as though resuming a conversation in which
he had quite the best of us a moment ago:

“After all, people are ranked in Springfield
according to their money. People with six
thousand dollars apiece a year are considered
decent and no questions are asked. People
with a million in buried gold or alcohol are on
a level of righteousness with the world saints,
who are, of course, admitted to their class by
generous dispensation. Heaven may be a
jungle but nothing will ever alter this great
law,” and the handsome jester, Devil’s Gold,
is shaking his bead-covered rattle, making
medicine and calling us by name. We are
so tired from our long walk that we cannot
but admire his gilded face and his yellow
magic blanket. And, holding each other’s
hands like lovers, we stoop and admire ourselves
in the golden pool that flickers in the
great campfire he has impudently built at the
crossing of two streets in Heaven.

But we do not step into the pool as before-time.
Our boat is beside us, it has overtaken

328
us like some faithful tame giant swan, and
Avanel whispers: “Take us where The Golden
Book was written.” And thus we are up and
away. The boat carries us deeper, down the
valley. We find the cell of Hunter Kelly,—St.
Scribe of the Shrines. Only his handiwork
remains to testify of him. Upon the walls of
his cell he has painted many an illumination
he afterward painted on The Golden Book
margins and, in a loose pile of old torn and
unbound pages, the first draft of many a familiar
text is to be found. His dried paint
jars are there and his ink and on the wall
hangs the empty leather sack of Johnny
Appleseed, from which came the first sowing
of all the Amaranths of our little city, and the
Amaranth that led us here.

And Avanel whispers:—“I ask my heart:—Where
is Hunter Kelly, and my heart
speaks to me as though commanded: ‘The
Hunter is again pioneering for our little city
in the little earth. He is reborn as the
humblest acolyte of the Cathedral, a child
that sings tonight with the star chimes, a
red-cheeked boy, who shoes horses at the old
forge of the Iron Gentleman. Let us also
return’.”

It is eight o’clock in the evening, at Fifth
and Monroe. It is Saturday night, and the

329
crowd is pouring toward The Majestic, and
Chatterton’s, and The Vaudette, and The
Princess and The Gaiety.

It is a lovely, starry evening, in the spring.
The newsboys are bawling away, and I buy
an Illinois State Register. It is dated March
1, 1920.

Avanel of Springfield is one hundred years
away.

The Register has much news of a passing
nature. I am the most interested in the
weather report, that tomorrow will be fair.

Written in Washington Park Pavilion,
Springfield, Illinois.

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.

Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.

End of Project Gutenberg's The Golden Book of Springfield, by Vachel Lindsay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN BOOK OF SPRINGFIELD ***

***** This file should be named 59860-h.htm or 59860-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/8/6/59860/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.