The Project Gutenberg EBook of Colorado Outings, by James Steele

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Colorado Outings

Author: James Steele

Release Date: July 15, 2019 [EBook #59923]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLORADO OUTINGS ***

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Colorado Outings

BY JAMES STEELE.

ISSUED BY THE PASSENGER DEPARTMENT

BURLINGTON ROUTE,

CHICAGO.

COPYRIGHT, 1898, BY

THE CHICAGO, BURLINGTON & QUINCY

RAILROAD COMPANY.

2

A Colorado Mountain View—The Mount of the Holy Cross,
as seen from near Leadville.

3

Colorado Outings.

CHAPTER I.

Glimpses of a Mountain World.

Colorado
—for thirty years no geographical name has been oftener
written in connection with the phrases that express height, vastness, space,
clearness and a colossal beauty that never wearies or changes or grows old.
Hundreds of books, millions of words, have described its scenes. Many
thousands have visited it. Endowed with a beauty of fascinating awfulness,
and with still another beauty that underlies the magnitude and sits
serene amid the grandeur, the inadequate, word-trammeled idea of it has
found endless expression, and yet the scenes of Colorado have never been
described. Whoever has visited her ever after turns aside from words;
whoever has not, can obtain from them but a faint conception of that which
in truth can be imagined only in actual presence—and hardly even then.

Yet it seems necessary that maps should be drawn, and details written
out, and the camera be called upon to reproduce the stupendous microscopic
detail, and that magnificence should find a biographer and be put into figures
that in the presence of the reality are almost meaningless. For it is a
work-a-day world. The questions of time, distance, convenience, cost, possibility,
cannot be barred from their foreordained connection in the human
mind with even the magnificence that was builded by the æons; the beauty
whose mother was cosmos.

Imagine, to begin with, the extent of this piece of scenery. Colorado
contains 104,500 square miles—66,880,000 acres. Of this vast area—as big
as all New England with Illinois added—two-thirds is mountains. Not
such as claim that name in Maine, New Hampshire, Virginia and the Carolinas,
but Titanic. The height of the average Alleghanies and of the Blue
Ridge is perhaps 2,500 feet. The famed peaks of the chain may rise sometimes
to 5,000 feet. Katahdin is 5,385 feet high, and there are others 3,400,
2,800, etc. The thirteen peaks of Mount Desert Island and vicinity are
from 1,000 to 2,800 feet high. Mount Agamenticus is a hill that claims 670
feet. Kearsarge, historic name, has only 3,250 feet. The Peaks of Otter, in
Virginia, climb to 4,200 feet.

4

They might all be lost in this Colorado
and never be found again. The state is
traversed by the main chain of the Rockies,
the oft-quoted “backbone of the
continent,” the huge rooftree of
our republic, prolific mother of
rivers, this great watershed gives
rise to the Rio Grande, the two
Plattes, the Arkansas, the rivers
of central Kansas, the Colorado
that in Arizona passes for two
hundred miles between those
sheer red walls that are the
scenic wonder of the world, and flows
at last into foreign seas.

Out of this mighty chain and its flanks rise the
peaks beside which most of the serenest heights
of the common world are as hillocks; Pike’s,
Gray’s, Long’s, Lincoln, Ouray, Grant, Sherman,
Yale, Harvard, Dome, Spanish Peaks, the Wet Mountains; and scores of
others whose heights range from 11,000 to 15,000 feet. To him who sees
them first from afar, perhaps across eighty miles of plains-country, where
the sudden rising against the sunset of the Rampart range seems impossible—to
him afar these seem not mountains, but clouds. Thenceforth he is
required to modify his views of elevation and to extend vaguely and indefinitely
his notions of the picturesque. For these giants also he may come to
know as familiar things. The flowers he may gather here also, and may
place his hand within the clefts of those red cathedral towers that were not
reared with hands. Here, too, has the human conquered, and up these vast
defiles the railways climb. Puny they seem amid their strange environment,
yet of the vast wonder they are become a part. Were there nothing else to
appal or please, these alone would repay the journey from afar, for they
illustrate once for all the unabashed capacities of that which amid nature’s
wonders, and everywhere is the wonder above all—the mighty human mind.

The Colorado Capital—In
Sixteenth Street, Denver.

It is a strange country. The very name is a memento of the passing
race that, first of Europeans, saw these serene pinnacles leaning against
the blue. The name means red, light-brown, ruddy, florid, and may even
be a synonym for joyousness.
A Dios con la Colorada
—go thou merrily

5

with God—is a phrase one may hear in Seville when lovers part. Why red?
Because the dizzy walls that fence the cataract are in Colorado oftenest of
the rich, dull red-brown that even human architecture chooses for its stateliest
spires. One may imagine the Spaniard who clanked his broken armor
in the Cañon of the Arkansas for the first time, and looked stiffly up at
those ruddy walls, and remembered ever afterward, as most men do, what
he saw in the land that is red.

Sublimity and beauty are not usually convertible terms. They do not
mean the same. Grandeur is austere. Yet here one finds the most singular
combinations of these two incompatibilities. The grandeur is over all; the
overpowering sentiment of the vast domain. Yet in all her nooks and corners
nestles the other—beauty beyond compare. When one looks for the
first time upon the Rampart range, fencing the western rim of that vast
undulating plain like a wall, it is impossible for him to imagine Manitou
and Ute Pass and Cheyenne Cañon and the road to the Garden of the Gods,
nestling there so near at hand beneath the cold dome of Pike’s Peak. When
one is at Cañon City, a pretty town sleeping among its orchards in the
sunshine, he does not think how soon his train will glide between the mighty
jaws of the Arkansas Cañon. When one traverses drowsily the mesa lands,
smooth and wide and given over to bees and gardens that lie west of Denver,
he cannot by himself foresee the Clear Creek Cañon just ahead, or imagine
the six parallel tracks and the windings and contortions that make the
“loop” at its farther end above Silver Plume. And at Salida, at five o’clock
in the morning, when the mountain world is filled with the turquoise blue—earth
and air and sky, not merely tinted, but full of the strange solid color
that heralds the mountain dawn—he cannot imagine the rare, sweet, thin
air of the heights of the Marshall Pass that is just ahead, or imagine the
rocky bosom of Ouray, bare, solemn, silent, changeless, serene in the vastness
of the upper air, yet so near that one may almost count the stones that
strew that gray summit where human toil and pain have never been.

6

Minnehaha Falls—Roadside cascade on the line of the Cog Railroad up Pike’s Peak.

7

So it is that beauty and grandeur have never been so nearly akin elsewhere
as they are in Colorado. Of nooks and corners and little valleys and
waterfalls grotesque shapes there are almost thousands. One may sit at a car
window all day, not knowing precisely where he is, or caring, and catch them
as they pass and come and go, until his soul is tired. Yet it is all on a scale
of inconceivable immensity. Even the mesas and tablelands, where the
grass grows as on a lowland farm, are 4,000 to 6,000 feet above the sea—more
than twice as high as Mount Everett. There is nothing low. One
cannot get down to the plane of all his life hitherto. The word “valley”
is a relative expression; low and high have not their usual significance.
Looking back as the train crawls up a mountain side in long doubling
curves, one is surprised to see floating far below him a long and trailing
film of silver lace; something so near and ethereal and beautiful that he
cannot recognize it as that which he has looked up to all his life—a cloud.
And on one side the valley sinks away, narrowing and lowering in distance
that seems infinite. One was down there half an hour ago—down in those
narrow depths, and they seemed high. But from the opposite window,
whither one transfers himself to see the very roof of the world, sure that he
has attained to such a height, as he looks out it is still up, up, up the slanting,
narrow track, the world of mountains below, above, everywhere. Were
he now far below he might look up and see this train as it actually is; see it
as one sees the small brown worm crawling slowly in a slanting line high
up on the face of the rugged, lichen-covered rock.

And if one will have it so, that is all there is to do in this world of mountains—sit
still and be carried amid heights and pines and clouds, in a new
air and an upper world that, save in respect of this railroad, has nothing in
it of human things.

Will the reader kindly glance at the map and note this spiderish network
of railways? When was it that the American engineer first discovered
that his art was precisely the opposite of what it had been imagined to be—traditional—and
that it was meant to make a locomotive climb where no
sane and humane man would think of pushing the reluctant donkey, and
amid heights and vastnesses where even the eagle was once, too, solitary?
Before anyone knew it, except the capitalists, the idea had been absorbed
by these unique brains, and the work was done. The result is one of the
most singular that can be added to ordinary human experiences. Most
travelers take it all for granted; it is there, and it works, and that is all.
Utterly unknown to fame, the men who did these things have finished them
and have gone away, but to them, nevertheless, is due, not one little railway
line led on tall steel trestles across a few difficult places, but the most
remarkable railway system of the world.

Queer experiences—small ones—occur at frequent intervals in the course
of this elevated and tortuous tour. As one passes by he may see a cleft
between the tawny walls that seems to him as narrow as a door—a gateway
into a mass of peaks that appear to lie jumbled and unbroken and inaccessible
for an unknown distance. But here as he looks back he may see dimly

8

shining in the half light the two steel rails of another road; a branch, perhaps,
but nevertheless leading somewhere into the heart of this unknown
world, and occupying all the space between the opening walls with their
narrow-gauge utilities. And then one wants to return to that place sometime,
and take that disappearing line, and be trundled into this new kingdom
to see what he may find there.

Map of Marshall Pass.

GUNNISON CITY

SARGENT

MARSHALL PASS

PONCHA

SALIDA

SARGENT

TO SALT LAKE

BUXTON

CHESTER

SHAWANO

MARSHALL PASS

GRAY’S

TO DENVER

PONCHA

MEARS

SHIRLEY

TO VILLA GROVE

PONCHA PASS

Your train may stop at some little station like Mears, beyond Salida.
Already you may have seen creeping up the mountain ahead of your train
another like it. And here at Mears, looking out and upward from your
window you again see this little train, this time directly above you two or
three hundred feet, on another track, and snakily gliding away through a
narrow gateway into the south. Reference to a map teaches you that this
was not a happening, and that this narrow gateway, as unreal as a stage
scene to the eye, and having a similar effect, is the opening of an extensive
system covering Southern Colorado and extending into New Mexico.

Scores of times you see, away above or far below, another track. You
may see only a section of it, cut off by rocks at each end, and manifestly
having nothing to do with you and your travels. Then a person suggests
that we were at that place half an hour ago, and asks if you think we
have any connection with still another track, glimpses of which may be
caught on the side of a mountain directly across, with a yawning chasm
between that would make a crow dizzy if he looked down. And after

9

awhile one is there also, looking across to where he once was, and in his
heart not believing it.

All over this majestic mountain world, without a moment of weariness
or hunger, without cold or heat or loss of rest, seeing all and realizing
little; this is the material and artificial wonder of Colorado travel.

Mingled with these general sensations are the special wonders—the
places and scenes that have been described in thousands of pages. In the
case of most of them it was never of much avail to try to put them into
words; with them all the camera reproduces in miniature scientifically
exact, but failing utterly to convey any other meaning than that of prettiness,
and there is not anything in Colorado that is merely pretty. When one
says that the mountain torrent foams and tumbles among the rocks beside
the track in the cañon for eight or ten miles, it is useless to say more.
Then this camera comes; a wonderful and indispensable machine, it is
true; and makes the white waterfall as big as one’s thumb nail—a foamy
spot in a suggested colossal setting—and that is all. The restlessness, the
tinkle, the indescribable sound of breaking foam, the overhanging shadow,
the glimpse of the far blue sky above and far beyond, the sense that this is
nature, careless utterly of you and all your tribe—all these things are left
out. To be amid these scenes is to live in a new way during the fleeting
time that one is there, and going away again it is to remember more vividly
after ten or twenty years than you did the day after you saw them first.

Scores of places are not in the guidebooks at all that strike the casual
stranger as vividly as anything that is. Every man’s Colorado is his own.
Descriptions weary him. In them the words, however well chosen, illustrate
only the orotund and the declamatory, not the thing described. All
the guidebooks need much to be done again, and there does not live the
man who can effectively rewrite them. Presence is required; presence
undeterred by all that is merely written, here or elsewhere.

It might be not unprofitably remembered that much of the pleasure lies
in the unmentioned things that lie between. One need not pass all the
fourteen miles of the Black Cañon looking for the single towering red shaft
that is called the Currecanti Needle. He need not wait and watch for
Chipeta Falls—a little snow-born rivulet that commits ten thousand
suicides in its tumble down the cliffs to die at last in the little tumbling
river that never notices, and goes on forever. He need not shut his eyes
because the guidebook gives him the impression that just ahead somewhere
stands that special wonder that he is almost sure he came so far

10

particularly to see. The entire endless, solemn, silent, chaotic mass that
fills the view for days has all its entirely undescribable charm.

And amid it all live the plodding sons of men. Each little mountain nook
where there is water has its occupant. Often there are ranch houses, and
cattle and haystacks. Little mountain towns cling to the bench here and
there. These things seem strange to us, but how must the wide Nebraska
cornfield seem to the man who was born and reared amid scenes like these?

A man said he did not want any of that land; he thought it might pay,
but he was not willing to undertake a Colorado farm with any hope of
success. Would not a man, he inquired, go out in the morning with the
best intentions, but with almost the certainty that he would sit down on the
plow-beam and look at these mountains almost all day? And he was
morally sure, besides, that he could never wait until Saturday, as they did
in Michigan, to go a-fishing. Look at the river, he said, can a man stay
away from that to farm?

A Nook in Estes Park.

James’ Ranch.

These are but glimpses. They fail, too, just as the guidebooks do, and
there is a vivid glimpse of but one fact—that a man can see and know, and
yet utterly fail to convey to any other human his conception of anything
beyond the merest commonplaces of a country that sends no messages,
writes no embellished chapters, and talks to her visitors only as the sibyl
did—personally and mysteriously or not at all.

11

CHAPTER II.

The Colorado of Reality.

There are two view-points for Colorado, as there are for a woman who
has two great endowments; wealth and personal beauty. Colorado is like
such a woman. Captivating all comers, she yet claims importance as an
industrial entity; a country with vast resources. In 1897, for example, she
produced something more than thirty millions in yellow gold. She feeds
herself besides, and has fruit, beef, wheat, galore.

But, attracted first by beauty, it is not such statistical, and withal very
pleasant, things as these the casual visitor cares most about. He wants
rather to understand the qualities and characteristics of so unique a piece
of God’s creation.

For it will finally come to be understood that of all the mountain kingdoms
she stands first, not even Switzerland and her Alps offering more
than a fair comparison. That crescent chain which forms the chiefest
attraction of Central Europe covers altogether an area of about 95,000
square miles. Its crowning peak, Mont Blanc, is 15,784 feet high, the most
famous and most often named of the mountains of the modern world.
But Colorado has many peaks lacking little of this height, and they stand
amid others much higher than, but not nearly so bleak, as those the Alpine
chain is made up of. The famous Jungfrau is 13,393 feet high. The
Matterhorn is still lower. Vegetation ceases at a lesser height than it does
in Colorado. The pass of the great St. Bernard is 8,170 feet high. Marshall
Pass in Colorado is 10,850 feet, and is climbed every day by the Denver &
Rio Grande Railroad and not much said about it. Veta Pass is over 9,000
feet high—another railway station. The town of Leadville, a familiar
residence for twelve thousand people, is 10,200 feet above the sea. Some
of the beautiful and famous parks of Colorado have their lowest depths
higher than the average height of the Alpine chain.

Vegetation is less affected by the altitude here than it is in Europe.
Cattle live all the year on indigenous grasses at elevations and in pastures
that figures of height would relegate to the woodchuck and the mountain
goat. Vegetables and fruits are raised in abundance in mountain valleys
wherein in Central Europe the vast, slow-crawling glacier would lie. Timber
line, and just above it eternal snow, mark 6,000 feet in the Northern Alps. In
Colorado 10,000 is not in all cases the limit of vegetation, and the perpetual
snow line is fixed at 11,000 feet, though on many heights almost unknown.

12

In Estes Park—James’ Ranch—Distant View.

13

Nor is the impression correct that Colorado is all mountainous. It is all
of the mountains, mountainlike, but at least one diversifying feature is the
parks. It is a Colorado name for mountain-fenced enclosures. No other
mountain country has it, neither has any other the especial feature. The
Colorado “park” is distinctive and remarkable. Many of them are of
small size, by which it must be understood that they are perhaps no bigger
than Rhode Island or Delaware. Those four that are named on the map
are at least as large as some of the more important of the New England
states. These are North Park, Middle Park, South Park and San Luis
Park in the extreme south.

North Park lies near the northern boundary of the state, and is the
basin into which run the numerous small streams which gather to make a
beginning for the North Platte River, which runs all the way across Nebraska
and into the Missouri a few miles south of Omaha; a good twelve hundred
miles as it turns. It was a famous game country, and now its streams
abound in the dainty-tasting mountain fish. Its surface is alternatively
meadow and forest. It is the highest in elevation of the four great parks,
and one of the loveliest regions in the world.

Middle Park lies next this to the south, separated from it by a range of
mountains; one of the numerous “Continental Divides,” and big enough to
be that, as are all others of the same name. Here rise the waters that
finally flow into the Colorado of the West, and at last reach the Gulf of
California; those that flow east, as the Platte, rising on the other side of the
range. This park is fifty miles wide by about seventy long, and its floor is
not a plane, but is traversed by ranges of hills of about the magnitude of the
Alleghanies. There are several distinct and extensive valleys. But the rim
is studded with some of the highest peaks of the state, among them Gray’s
Peak, Long’s Peak and Mount Lincoln, rising to an elevation of 13,000 to
14,000 feet.

Beside it on the west lies the smaller basin, called Egerea Park, and on
its northeast side is Estes Park. At its southeast corner lies the wee
county of Gilpin, one of the oldest, longest-yielding and richest gold
districts of the world.

South Park is thirty miles wide and about sixty long; a basin that furnishes
the headwaters of the Arkansas and South Platte rivers. It is the
best known of all the parks, as the discovery of rich mines in early times
opened roads and established settlements. The scenery is charming, and
fine pasturage and water offered superior inducements to those who were

14

in Colorado at a time when a
man could much more easily
have what he fancied than
he can now. The three hours’ ride
across the southern edge of this park
on a clear afternoon, on the Colorado
Midland road, is an event to one new to these scenes. Here the South
Platte River loses entirely the character one learns to think is that of
every mountain stream, and has not even banks. The clear stream, entirely
unruffled, lies in innumerable bends—almost coils—along this level floor,
without any willow fringes, or even tall grass, just bank-full and no more.
But it makes up for this preternatural quietness when it breaks into its
foreordained cañon at the eastern edge, and begins its journey of some
hundreds of miles into Central Nebraska, where, in Lincoln County, it
joins its twin, which rises in North Park. Looking at the map one wonders
what mysterious affinity brings these two divergent branches together
at last, across distance, high mountains, wide plains and every obstacle
possible to running water.

Hell Gate, on the Colorado
Midland Railway.

The San Luis Park is the last and largest of these unique mountain
amphitheaters, and lies in the southern portion of the state. It surrounds
a beautiful lake of the same name, some sixty miles in length, and into
which run nineteen streams. The San Luis Lake has no known outlet, but
in the respect of being fresh and not salt it departs from the usual rule of
lakes with no outflowing waters. This area of about 18,000 square miles,
included in San Luis Park, is among the choicest known for the uses of
civilization. It was the only portion of what is now Colorado that was to

15

any great extent permanently occupied by the Mexicans. About 25,000
of them lived here when our occupancy began, and fully that number of
their descendants are there still. It was into this region that one Lieut.
Zebulon M. Pike, of the United States army, blindly wandered while he
was surveying interior Louisiana—how strangely the matter-of-fact old
story reads now—and was politely taken in and escorted to the capital, the
opulent and ancient Santa Fe, and much further elsewhere. He died in
battle at last, a soldier and the son of a soldier, and this little excursion
into wilds absolutely unknown so short a time ago gave him the most
colossal and enduring of monuments—Pike’s Peak.

In this beautiful region—where, besides the nineteen streams that feed
San Luis Lake, sixteen others flow into the Rio Grande, here a little white
mountain stream newly born—it is surprising how little great elevation
affects trees, grass and flowers. It is an all-the-year cattle country at
almost any height. Big trees grow 10,000 feet above the sea. Cereals and
the tender vegetables thrive at 7,000 feet, and potatoes at 8,000. Beautiful
flowers and all the grasses are found at 11,000, and the pines and firs are of
fair size at 11,500 feet.

It is singular the discriminating eye for a good thing the early Spaniard
had, here and in California, especially the padres. They knew it when they
saw it, and took it and kept it for a considerable time. And then we got it—always.
And they accept us as neighbors and fellow-citizens and lawmakers
without any ill-will, and keep on doing just as they always did, and
as their ancestors did in Spain four hundred years ago.

When the reader has assimilated the idea of these Colorado parks he is
left only one other mental task—to conceive of all the rest as a piled-up
succession of panoramas. Behind each other, far into the purple distance,
the ranges lie tier upon tier. The valleys that lie between, great and small,
number thousands. There are in Colorado two hundred and sixty snow-born
small streams, but large enough to have each a name. There are nine
named lakes. There are sixty-three rivers. Besides some seventy peaks
that are still unnamed there are about one hundred and fifty towering
domes that have names already given.

Amid these general scenes lie half-hidden those that are particularly
beautiful; the nooks and corners where one wonders grudgingly when one
comes upon them if they have lain there through the ages, and have been
as beautiful as they are to-day, wasted, so to speak, in a world where gems
are so very rare. There is an impression, held without warrant, but natural,

16

that these places have charms, yes, but that they are overrated and overwritten
after the manner of western efflorescence and the frontier desire to
surprise. The truth is that quite such scenes and places do not exist elsewhere
in all the world; that when white men first saw some of them they
were unable to convey to others any adequate idea of them by means of
even their own picturesque vocabulary. Since then, and always, the same
difficulty exists, because in the inadequacy of mere descriptive words the
idea becomes confused, and exaggeration is taken for granted. There is a
natural reason why hundreds of men and women should go to Colorado,
should meet there a revelation of natural beauty that leaves them permanently
affected, and yet should speak of their experiences only to each
other. It is useless to talk, or, alas! to write.

Sopris Peak, near Aspen, as seen from the Valley.
12,972 feet high.

17

CHAPTER III.

The Colorado Pleasure Ground—Manitou.

When the Colorado visitor comes for the first time he is fortunate if his
approach is by one of those lines whose trains, like those of the Burlington,
come careering across the high plains from the eastward at an hour that
shows the notched and serrated mountain wall against the sky. There is
no other mountain approach in the world like that to Colorado from the
east. Here is the sudden ending of that wide and silent vastness in which
the modern traveler now lives less than twenty-four hours, but which the
old-time wanderer dwelt in for more than a month. To reach this mountain
world, ending abruptly at the plain, is a surprise. Let one ray of sunshine
lie upon a peak, far in the distance, and it is known that the fleecy texture
of a cloud could not give back that peculiar glint, cold and bright and half
a frown, and that these huge shapes are, at last, the Rocky Mountains.
Such a glimpse may not occur to the railway traveler once in a hundred
journeys, but if seen it is a suggestion of the spires that Bunyan saw; the
Beulah that lies beyond the river.

More than a quarter of a century ago, before the time of the transcontinental lines, the
present writer, visiting his guard lines at 4 o’clock in the morning on the banks of the Purgatoire,
has seen one rose-colored spot high up among the fading stars, and wondered what
it was. The mirages of the plains had shown no mountains to the westward while daylight
lingered. It was the sunrise on Pike’s Peak, eighty miles away.

To this eastward edge of the mountains and western ending of the plains
all westward travelers come first, and it is here that the majority linger. In
it are situated Denver, Colorado Springs, Manitou, Pueblo, Trinidad, Golden,
Boulder, Fort Collins, Greeley, etc. These names are all familiar. Their
situation in respect to each other is in a crooked line running north and south
along the edge of the high plains, and about three hundred miles long.
Greeley is furthest north and Trinidad furthest south. Denver is the center
of the line, singularly situated as the gateway to all that lies to the westward.

It is useless to attempt to occupy attention with a description of this
beautiful and well-known city. It is in reality of the plains, though standing
at an elevation of over five thousand feet. To it all roads lead, and
from it all go out toward the nooks and corners of an intricate mountain
system. The foothills of the real mountains rise behind it, as high as the
average Alleghanies.

Southward and northward from Denver lie the resorts that all tourists
visit, whether or not they go into the interior, whose general aspects have
been sketched in a previous chapter. Chief among these is Manitou.

18

The road from Manitou to the Garden of the Gods—One of the most beautiful drives known.

19

To visit Manitou it is necessary to take one of three lines running directly
south from the capital to Colorado Springs, a distance of seventy-eight
miles. This city is built on the mesa, and to be a health resort was not its
original purpose. But such it is, and it has a wide reputation with that class
who wish to avoid the activity and merriment of Manitou, which lies in
sight to the westward. The hotels are fine, and, speaking largely, every
day in the year is sunny. To be able always to see the mountains, and to
be able also at any time, and by an easy railroad or carriage ride, to enter
some of their most beautiful nooks, is an attraction to many hundreds of
people. The town has a population of about twelve thousand, and an
elevation of nearly six thousand feet. Like Denver, it stands on the edge
of the plains.

Between Denver and Colorado Springs or Manitou there are several
smaller resorts, all on railroad lines running south from Denver. Among
these is the village of Castle Rock, deriving its name from the castellated
cliff under which it nestles. Perry Park, a little distance away from the
line, is in a park filled with rock formations similar to those found in the
famous Garden of the Gods, near Manitou. Palmer Lake lies in the midst
of good foothill scenery. The peaks of the Snowy Range are visible from
near this point, and the walks and drives of the neighborhood are fine.
Glen Park, half a mile away, is the Chautauqua of Colorado. It is one of
the prettiest glens in this region of nooks and glens, and the cliff behind it
is 2,000 feet high. The Chautauqua assembly is held here annually, and
otherwise the place is used for summer residence and for outings.

Almost midway between Colorado Springs and Manitou, and in sight of
both, is the old town of Colorado City. It was the first capital of Colorado,
and in some one of the now dilapidated log buildings, wanderers in an unknown
land called themselves to order after the manner of the usual American
empire builder.

Manitou
—About this unique spot there will always be something to
say. But generalities do not describe it. He who has not been there at all
can get from them no conception of the real place. And it is not so much
a place as it is a locality; the center of a group of beautiful places that
have made it, with its surroundings, a spot once seen never to be forgotten.

Imagine the outward opening of Ute Pass—a cleft in the undulating
mountain wall extending backward and upward. It opened into the plain,
as Pike’s tattered wanderers first saw it, in V-shape, and in this notch bubbled
three or four peculiar springs. There was no one there. The antelope

20

and buffalos from
the plains, and the
black-tailed deer
and elks from the
mountains came
there to drink. The
Utes trailed down
the rocky cañon
that bears their
name, single file, afoot,
and camped beside the
springs. One of them
went out to the edge of the mesa, east toward Colorado Springs and lay
down on his naked stomach and peeped out over the plain from behind
a sage bush, and was on picket duty there to watch lest the plains Apache
catch his kindred unaware.

Car and Engine used in
the Ascent of Pike’s Peak by
the Cog Railroad.

The waters bubbled as they rose, and had a faint sweetish taste, and the
savages, and all who have since tasted them, liked them well. They were
“medicine waters,” too. There is a pleasant supposition that these painted
savages named the place “Manitou”—a name used by the Indians of
Cooper and tradition to express the idea of a spirit, God or Devil, indifferently.
It is a pretty name in sound, and the legend does not the slightest
harm. In reality, the Utes owned these unknown mountains in large part,
and they also liked to hunt buffalo on the plains, and they passed this place
in their migrations because it was convenient and they were thirsty. All
that is left of them now is their one supposed word, “Manitou.”

Then, as now, the strange wind-wrought obelisks of the Garden of the
Gods stood near at hand, and in the trail the huge Balanced Rock seemed
waiting to be pushed to its fall by some passing child. Then, as now, the
gateway, guarded by its red perpendicular portals, springing more than
three hundred feet straight up from the level plain, stood open. The clefts
in the mountain’s flank that are called the north and south Cheyenne Cañons
were there as now, and the cascade that falls in seven leaps five hundred
feet in the southern cañon was there, it is almost difficult to believe,
precisely as it is to-day and as it has been for ages. All the trees were
there; the Douglas spruce, the Rocky Mountain pine, the Picea Grandis,
the creepers, the mauve and white clematis, and, over all, towering and
inaccessible, the red granite walls.

21

The twin cañon to the northward held its tumbling waters too, and
Seven Lakes, Monument Park, Rainbow Falls, Manitou Park, Williams’
Cañon, Cave of the Winds, Engleman’s Cañon, Red Cañon, Crystal Park,
Glen Eyrie—all these were the same as now, but unnamed and almost
unnoted. Nothing in the modern world is ever done until a railroad comes.

Yet there has been a change; as great a change as the ingenuity of man
can make in everlasting things. The Manitou Grand Caverns have been
discovered and opened, precisely as though nature had not been lavish
enough before, and must needs do some other brilliant thing through man’s
accident and luck. Wagon roads have been graded in all directions, and
from one famous place to another, until there is no pleasure ground in
America, possibly in the world, so well equipped for out-of-doors pleasure
in a climate that has no vicissitudes, and amid remarkable scenes that have
been clustered around this one favored spot with a profusion unknown
elsewhere in all the civilized world.

To South Cheyenne Cañon from Manitou it is nine miles; to North
Cheyenne Cañon eight and one-half; from the mouth of the cañon to the
Rainbow Falls and Grand Caverns it is one and one-half miles, and every
visitor wishes it was further, because it is a road of rugged sweetness quite
unequaled; to Red Cañon it is three miles; to Crystal Park, three; to the
Garden of the Gods, three—a drive lovely as pleasure knows, with an
extraordinary scene at the end of it; to Glen Eyrie it is five miles; to
Monument Park by “trail”—which is native for a fine riding road—it is
seven and one-half miles; by carriage road it is nine miles; to Seven Lakes,
again by trail, it is nine miles; to the summit of Pike’s Peak, this time by
the Cog Road, it is nine wonderful miles, with an elevation rarely attained
in this life at the end of it; to the same by trail it is thirteen miles. There
are four ways of going up this mountain, to climb which was a few years
ago a remarkable feat—afoot, horseback, by carriage and by rail. All
these ways are practised, according to the spirit and physical condition of
the visitor. The bicycle, for only this once, is not included.

These are some of the show places, the world-renowned scenes about
which there cannot easily be any exaggeration. People linger among them
for months, and go to them again and again.

But in addition to these there are scores of mountain nooks and corners;
cañons, caves, waterfalls; private places that the visitor seeks out or
casually finds for himself. There are acres, and quarter and half acres that
have been discovered hundreds of times, and are owned, practically without

22

cost, by the finder for so long as he lingers amid these scenes. There may
be sometimes a pair, to whom the place is a joint-stock enterprise.

Within the limits of Manitou there are nine springs, all cold mineral
waters. They are of two kinds; the “soda” springs, effervescent and resembling
in taste and quality appollinaris water, and the iron springs. All
are medicinal, and all have records of cures. They are at least the nucleus
of an agreeable supposition: the beautiful scenery, the crisp mountain air,
the out-of-doors, the inducements to activity, the tiredness that is really
rest—these are the health-restoring facilities of Manitou. The waters are
very pleasant, and may be regarded as a duty, always with the understanding
that if the visitor is made over again in the course of a few weeks, as he
often is, he may ascribe it to the waters if he wishes.

The Colorado Mining Industry.
Miner’s Pack Train near Aspen.

It is manifest that of such a place a volume might be written. The
specific attractions of each attraction cannot here be described. It would
be useless space-writing if they were. Manitou, once visited, remains ever
after a picture of the mind, never put into words. Over all, always, shimmers
the indescribable Colorado sunshine, a light that is not of other lands.

So far as creature comforts are in question, Manitou has long been sumptuously
equipped. There are five large hotels, capable of accommodating

23

an aggregate of over twelve hundred guests. There are, besides, many
small hotels, and there are cottages that may be rented for periods of
weeks or months.

One of the notable works of man at Manitou is the Cog Railroad to the
summit of Pike’s Peak. It was completed in 1891, and is in many respects
singular even for its kind. It climbs in the eight and three-quarters miles
of its length to a height of 14,147 feet above sea level. It cost half a
million dollars, and the construction is of the very highest class. There is
a cog-rail in the center, between the two other rails, which weighs a hundred
and ten tons to the mile. At intervals of two hundred feet the track is
anchored to heavy masonry. Brakes are so contrived that the train can be
stopped on any grade within a distance of ten inches. The trucks of the
cars and engines are always tilted at the angle of the ascent, but in the
case of the former the seats are level to the sitter, and the engines are built
high at one end and remain so, even on level ground. The engine does
not pull the train, but pushes it. Three hours are consumed in making the
ascent, and a hundred passengers make a load for the train. Stops are
made at interesting points on the way up.

There are many feats of engineering and in the overcoming of great
physical difficulties that render this the most remarkable of the climbing
passenger railroads of the world. The ascent of this big mountain was
always a feat by the ordinary means; the elevation is one not usually
attained in this life under any circumstances, and the sensations are
indescribable in words.

No attempt is here made to describe in detail the scenes within the
scenes at Manitou. No one who has been there ever attempts this even in
ordinary conversation. They who return from the Cheyenne cañons or
the Garden of the Gods are ever a silent company. That name Manitou
should be applied to the entire region, as indicating vaguely that spirit far
removed from the platitudes and tediousness of ordinary language and
common life that pervades it all.

24

A famous piece of railway construction—“The Loop,” above Georgetown.

25

CHAPTER IV.

The Colorado Pleasure Grounds, II.

The “Loop” Journey.

In almost the opposite direction from that which takes the visitor to
Manitou, and still near the eastern rim of the mountains, is one cañon that
can be visited from Denver in a day. It lies upon one of the lines of the
U. P., D. & G. road, and is known as Clear Creek Cañon.

This defile in the mountains has been long known. When Colorado was
young it was a miners’ wagon road over the range. Tens of thousands have
seen it, and it still remains, especially to one who has no time to see the
overpowering scenery in the interior, an experience not to be left out.

From Denver it is fifteen miles to Golden, which is the simple name of a
town, one of the original gold camps, over a stretch of country that was once
an inlet of the great plains sea, and is as level as the Nebraska prairie. It
is a fruit, farm and ranch country, suggesting nothing of the scene that is
so near at hand. The basin in which the town lies is the bottom of this sea,
and the rocks around the shore are water worn, and show where the waves
once lapped. But a little distance beyond lies the opening to this famous
gorge and its tumbling stream, and thence the road follows it for more than
twenty miles.

The place, like most cañons, is apparently a cooling crock; a place that
opened in the shrinking of the crust when the white-hot world began to
harden. The projections of one side vaguely fit the indentations of the
other. Very often the red walls come very close together, revealing, as
one looks upward, only a narrow blue streak where the sky is.

Imagination, and a desire to have a place of beginning in detailed
descriptive writing, have given these rugged rock faces peculiar resemblances,
and fantastic names. They become faces, bold profiles, fairy
castles. But the dignity of the place does not bear out any of these
similitudes. Its charm lies in a general massive beauty; a something that
is feebly expressed by the word “grandeur.” This is enhanced by the fact
that one is there at the bottom of the gorge, and can look upward to dizzy
heights that are constantly changing before the eye. There are places
where the sun does not shine; others where the walls widen a little and one
catches a glimpse of white peaks far off. Foaming along the bottom runs
Clear Creek—now often of a color far from clear because of its admixture
with tailings from extensive mining operations far toward its head. It is

26

useless, here or elsewhere, to try to describe these Colorado torrents. They
make a picture upon the inner consciousness, and one can shut his eyes
long afterward and see and hear them. But they have no
technique
; only
some human picture has that; and they are not the proper subjects of the
inadequate things we know as words. All that a distant reader can be
asked to do is to imagine a plain suddenly estopped by a red wall of rocks.
In this wall a narrow gateway; a square, sheer opening, and into this he
glides. After the entrance the walls grow higher and higher, and for half
a day he is seated in a gliding box with a roaring torrent beneath or beside
him, and these vast walls fencing him in on both sides. There are hundreds
of sharp turns, and often the sides of his upholstered gliding box almost
touch the wall. There is no opening but that which is toward the sky.
For countless ages only these foaming waters broke the silence here.
It is interrupted now only by the feeble clank of the wheel upon
the rail—the wheel and rail that are, after all is said, the only
powers that may not be daunted by such scenes.

In the V-shaped opening at the
western end of Clear Creek Cañon lies
Idaho Springs, a mining town, where,
if these scenes are new to the visitor,
odd glimpses may be caught of a life
and traffic to most of the world unknown.
The surrounding hills are
marked with white spots high
up, and these scars are almost
countless. Mining is everything,
and everywhere, and scenery is
incidental. But Idaho Springs,
as its name might indicate, is also
a health resort. The springs consist
of both hot and cold mineral water,
and there is a natural vapor bath and
boiling springs. The climate is celebrated
even in Colorado.

Country Road Bridge over the Uncompahgre
River—Western Colorado.

Fourteen miles further westward is
Georgetown, and the road thither is
simply an extension of the Clear Creek
Cañon, here taking the form of a

27

sloping-sided and very narrow valley. The town has a population of nearly
four thousand people. These mountain towns, sheltered by the high ranges,
have all a more equable climate than Denver. There is hardly one that is
not both a winter and summer health resort. Strong men who came to
this country many years ago with weak lungs, seeking the one great
desideratum of a climate where they could live all the year out of doors,
have gone wherever occupation and circumstances drew them in the
mountains, and are conscious as a rule of no great difference in locality
within certain well-defined and very wide lines. Winter does not interfere
with any industry of the country. The sheltered valley, wherever it lies in
central and southern Colorado, at least, furnishes a residence for that large
class who would surely die in two years in the east, who know that fact,
and who live here in health until they are old.

Perched high above Georgetown is the famous “Loop,” a wonderful
piece of railroad engineering skill. The mining town of Silver Plume is
perched at the apex of this work. Many eastern roads have “Horseshoe”
and “Muleshoe” curves, and make lithographs of them, and speak of
them as engineering triumphs worthy of the passenger’s particular attention.
So they were in their time, but they have been incalculably surpassed
in dozens of cases in Colorado.

The word “Loop” is in this case largely a misnomer. It is a railroad

coil
. The doubles and turns are carried to an extent to the date of its
building unknown to railway engineering. There are places where one
can count five tracks below him from his window, apparently having no
connection with each other. The entire entanglement lies about ten
thousand feet above sea level. Still higher above the uppermost turn there
are working mines, the little square openings to which are like dormer
windows let into the immeasurable sloping roof of the world. The casual
traveler does not understand, the present writer does not know, how these
openings are reached from the lower world. There are said to be lateral paths,
not seen from the railway, where the patient and remarkably clear-headed
burro hath his mission as a very common carrier. It was once thought beneath
the dignity of the average American to use this plodding beast as his
assistant, but the exigencies of steepness bring him at once far to the front.
All over Colorado he is a factor, eating little, working much, patient, plodding,
long eared and long lived, content as always with thistles and sunshine.

28

Glimpse of the Valley of Grand River—A characteristic Colorado valley scene.

29

Two and one-half miles from Georgetown is the famous Green Lake. It
is 10,000 feet above the sea. It is full of fish, largely mountain trout, not
now, however, as easily caught as they were in early times. It is a huge
basin full of perfectly clear, deep water, but there is a prevailing tint of
green; water, sand, moss, and even the oar drippings, are all green. At
certain hours in late afternoon, when all the shadows and reflections are
right, it is possible to catch glimpses of its great depth. There is a forest
there, the trees still standing, but turned to stone.

Seven miles away is Argentine Pass, where the highest wagon road in
the world is. From this pass there is a view that is remarkable, and for
this alone, the delightful road excursion to the pass is made by hundreds of
people every year. Four miles from Green Lake is Highland Park, a resort
and famous place for picnics. One day’s ride by stage takes the tourist to
Grand Lake, the largest body of water in Colorado. This lake is also full
of trout, and its numerous tributaries afford fishing in plenty to those who
like running water. The surrounding region has grouse and large game
in plentifulness quite remarkable for these late times.

In Clear Creek Cañon, coming up, a rather remarkable railway junction
is found. It is called “Forks of the Creek,” and there does not seem to be
much room for car yards and switches, since the place is merely the running
into the main cañon of a lateral one, with its walls little less steep and high
than those of the main gorge are. But the branch line from here goes to
Black Hawk and Central City, famous mining towns. These places can be
reached also from Idaho Springs—by stage across the six miles intervening,
done in one hour. On this stage road lies Russell Gulch, where in 1858
the first paying gold east of California was discovered by a man named
Russell from Georgia, one of the original pioneers from that state to Colorado.
The gulch was a great camp thirty years ago, and the remains are
there to-day. Three miles further on is Central City, crawling up the
mountain side. It is in the little rich county of Gilpin, previously mentioned.
Mining industries abound in every direction.

A few minutes’ ride or walk down the cañon brings one to Black Hawk,
though by rail it is four miles—a slight illustration of the exigencies of
railway building in this country. On this four miles still further exigencies
are illustrated by probably the only permanent “switchback” now in use.
While going backward and forward down the sloping mountain—five hundred
feet of descent in the four miles—one can look out of the car window
and see, hundreds of feet below, the winding cañon down from Central City.

From Black Hawk the train may be taken back to Denver, going eleven
miles to the junction mentioned in the heart of Clear Creek Cañon.

30

Gray’s Peak, one of the highest in Colorado, and its ascent by horses is
an excursion often made either from Georgetown or Idaho Springs. The
ride, to the beginning of the ascent by carriages, is one of the choicest of
Colorado excursions. It is past Silver Plume to Graymont, at which point
one may stop if scenery and views are the sum of his desires. Gray’s Peak
is a little higher than Pike’s, but the ascent is easier. It is not unusual to
start the horseback journey so early in the summer morning that the summit
may be reached in time to see the sun rise. It is, of course, true that a
description of this scene does not lie within the power of language, of colors,
of the camera, or within any field but that of the remembering imagination.
Painters, poets and writers come back discouraged. It changes the
current of thought for the remainder of a lifetime, and tinges the creeping
sordidness of the common world with a color that hereafter never entirely
fades. To all, in whatever estate, this sordidness is an enveloping fog;
accustomed unseen. There does not live a man or woman to whom the
heights of Colorado are not necessary, once in their lives if no more.

End of the Stage Ride from Terminal of the
Burlington Route—Estes Park.

It will be understood that it is not intended to do more here than give
a sketch of an easy journey out of Denver into a celebrated mountain
region. This little journey may be made over the “Loop” and back in one
day. It may last a month or all summer. It is one of the remarkable
features of Colorado travel that this trip among the heights and fastnesses
of nature, and all other delightful journeys here, can be made without a
moment of hardship, or even of inconvenience. Civilization is everywhere.
Roads, railways, bridges, towns, dot the mountain world. Yet that world
remains unchanged, lovely and magnificent in single phrase, and capable
of being seen and enjoyed with an expenditure little greater than that
which is always necessary at home or elsewhere.

31

CHAPTER V.

Nooks and Corners.

The State of Colorado contains four thousand three hundred and
fifty-seven miles of railroads in a mountain area of a hundred and five
thousand square miles. In any other state every mile of this would be
“scenic,” and the most uninteresting part of it would elsewhere serve to
divert extensive travel.

In this area, penetrated in every part by the astonishing railway mileage
given, there are a hundred and fifty-five mountain peaks that are over
thirteen thousand feet high. That is ten times as many as all Europe
holds. One of these, situated so as to be seen sometimes a hundred miles
across the plains, is forsooth climbed by a human railroad, and can be
scaled and descended and the traveler be far on his way toward home
within the daylight hours of one eventful day. When one begins to describe
this country he has to deal with all the majesties, mountains, parks,
crags, cañons, glens, waterfalls, geysers, lakes, caverns, cliffs, buttes, all
spread out on a tremendous scale, none of them small. There are, it is
said, seventy-two high peaks that yet stand nameless, waiting for some form
of concurrent opinion as to how these colossal sons of nature shall be best
called in mere human speech.

There are about five hundred lakes, large and small, some of them
distinguished by a famous name, and many still asleep in mountain
hollows almost unknown, where every wanderer who finds them is a discoverer
for himself.

There are about six thousand miles of running water, born of snow,
filled with fish, most of their countless windings still untraced by him who
bears a rod and basket and would like to lure to unequal combat and certain
death the mountain fishes, all “game” and difficult of capture. In the
far recesses of the mountains there are places still unknown to all save
one—the prospector—and here linger the mountain lion, the panther, black,
cinnamon, grizzly and silver-tip bears, wildcats, lynxes, porcupines, deer,
elks, antelope, and all the creatures of the wilds. These are never common;
all the hunters’ tales do not ever make them that, and they must be hunted.
He who finds and slays them is an adventurer, and was always such.

32

Glenwood Springs—General view.

33

Mineral springs abound. No one knows how many there are, yet there
is a long list of them already well known. The names Manitou, Glenwood,
Poncha, Pagosa, Buena Vista, Ouray, Idaho, Cañon City, have been heard
by all. Every town has its especial waters. At some of these there has
been a lavish expenditure of capital and hotel palaces have arisen. Some
are so especially endowed with outlying attractions that the waters are a
secondary consideration, and of these is Manitou. Others have extraordinary
temperatures and volume, so that nature’s chemistry is the pastime
of hundreds, and of these is Glenwood. Others are the favored of a few.
Every prospector knows of one or more, where isolated cases believe that
they must drink or die; have drunk, and did not die.

Every railway line in Colorado is truly an excursion line; to ride over it
is a pleasure tour, and one that the man in health and seeking rest and
recreation alone will enjoy first before he calmly chooses a spot wherein to
rest, and which will thereafter be
his
chosen place before all others. In
this way thousands of tastes are gratified every year, and each one wonders
why all others cannot see with him in
his
place advantages incomparable
and quite inexpressible. The Denver & Rio Grande Railroad can reel off,
so to speak, two dozen mineral springs and health and pleasure resorts on
its lines in one small publication, not mentioning at all the places that are
famous as scenery, passes, heights, cañons, mountains and astounding feats
of railway construction. These number scores.

The Colorado Midland road, with less mileage and covering a much
smaller extent of country, mentions fourteen resorts, besides twice or thrice
as many famous pieces of scenery.

And here it may be remarked that of the famous resorts of Colorado
one is reached by both the Denver & Rio Grande and the Colorado Midland.
This is Glenwood Springs, sharing with Manitou an almost equal
fame. The place is at the junction of Grand River and Roaring Fork, in
a valley that is like an elongated bowl. The springs themselves are
phenomenal, running out on both sides of the river, and varying from
twenty to a thousand cubic inches a second—among the largest in the
world. Those on the north side of the river discharge an immense body of
water at a temperature of 140 degrees Fahrenheit, and this stream is made
to flow through an aqueduct on both sides of an island. On this island
stands the famous bathing house. Here is found every species of bathing
arrangement housed in magnificent style. There are twenty-two large
two-room bathing apartments for each sex—forty-four in all—and each is
supplied with hot, cold or warm mineral water, and the same temperatures
of fresh water, and also showers of either. Here in the heart of the mountains
will be found all the appliances of the highest grade of civilization,

34

electric lights, smoking, billiard
and eating rooms, linen rooms,
hair-dressing rooms, laundries,
etc. The feature of the place
is perhaps the swimming bath.
It is a huge out-of-doors oval
tank, full of hot water, and ranging
in depth from three and a half to
five and a half feet. Two thousand
gallons a minute of hot mineral
water pours into this huge artificial
swimming place, the high temperature
being reduced by colder water
as it enters.

These features—chief among
which is, of course, the hot mineral
water in immense volume, making
the place remarkable among the
resorts of the world—are backed
by a hotel which takes rank among
the palaces. It has two hundred
guest rooms, in nearly all of which
are open fireplaces, and there is
every convenience that pertains to
civilization, mention of which in
detail is merely tiresome to the accustomed
Colorado visitor. One of
the features of our national life is
seldom mentioned, and there is now
only a small class for whom the
mention is worth while. It is that
wherever the American establishes
himself he takes with him all there
is. The refinement, the culture,
the “style” of Newport and Saratoga are all duplicated at Manitou and
Glenwood, housed magnificently of themselves and environed by scenes
in comparison with which those of most of the pleasure places of the
world are tame.

The Middle Falls of the Cascade in Cheyenne Cañon,
near Manitou—This glen and waterfall
are among the most celebrated in the world.

35

A third line, the Union Pacific, Denver & Gulf, has all the famous
country beyond Clear Creek Cañon, full of scenery, resorts and mines; the
South Park line to Leadville and Gunnison—a trip often made by the
Colorado tourist for the pleasure of the journey—with the most famous
mining “camp” of the world at the end of it.

The Burlington Route has a line running northwest from Denver to
Lyons, whence one of the few remaining famous mountain stage rides may
be taken to that which is by many—by all who know it well—considered to
be the gem of the Colorado parks, Estes.

This park was in its time the most famous of the natural feeding grounds
for all the Colorado animals. It is largely so yet, though in visiting it there
is always a half regret that its location was ever divulged in type, so that it
might have remained always a chosen spot for those only who could appreciate
its original loveliness and were willing to share it with the animals who
live there. It is skirted by mountains nine, eleven and fourteen thousand
feet high. Two peaks of granite stand on either side of its only feasible
entrance. The interior is shaped irregularly and there is little level ground.
It is made up of natural lawns and of slopes and grades. It is but twenty
miles in length and is not more than two miles wide in any place. One
bright, swift trout stream, known prosaically as the Big Thompson, is born
in the snow of Long’s Peak and flows crookedly through it from end to end.
This is really one of the loveliest streams in the world. There are waterfalls
and little lakes, fine groupings of trees, lawns that seem the work of
the landscape gardener on a large scale. Nevertheless, sublimity is the
dominant feature of Estes Park, after all. There are pinnacles of rosy
granite, the streams are lost in cañons almost or quite inaccessible, and the
upper end of almost every valley is closed in mystery. There are, though
it seems so far removed from the actual heart of the Rockies, seven mountain
ranges between Estes Park and the plains.

The lowest part of the park is 7,500 feet high. The summer midday is
very warm, but every night is cool, almost cold. People live there and
farm and there is no lack of either accommodation or hospitality. Still it
is isolated, with the charm of nature utterly unbroken, a good place to fish
and near the best remaining hunting grounds, perhaps, after all, the
loveliest summer-time resting place in all this wonderland of nature.

36

A Mountain Hotel—The Half-Way House on the carriage road up Pike’s Peak.

37

All this northern region of which Estes Park is the gem calls loudly to
that large class who imagine they have enough of society at home, and who
wish for two or three blissful summer weeks to go where the Red Gods call
them; to fish, or hunt, or to lie under pines and blink at the mottled sunshine,
forgetful of newspapers and telegrams, and stiff collars and polished
boots. Of such as these are the churls who build railroads and conduct
enterprises and write real books, and torment their days with action and
their nights with thinking. Some of these shamelessly bestow their women
folk and their young men at Glenwood or Manitou, or elsewhere beneath
a mingling of mountain shadows and electric lights, and then abscond with
other temporary satyrs like unto themselves to Estes Park and places even
further away.

And there is a line of travel thus far, and amid many other enforced
omissions, not mentioned at all. It is operated by the Denver & Rio
Grande road, and may be said to begin at that point mentioned in a
preceding chapter, a little station beyond Salida, where in the early morning
a train mysteriously vanishes within a side cañon, seemingly on a
prospecting tour amid unknown depths and distances. The tour of this
train they call familiarly “Around the Circle”—a circle several hundred
miles in circumference.

This journey traverses the San Luis Park. It crosses the southern
boundary line into New Mexico and throws out an attenuated and very
crooked arm to Santa Fe, in the heart of a civilization that is the oldest
and quaintest in America. One would hardly credit the fact that at the
moment of disappearance this vanishing train is crossing the huge
northern rim of San Luis Park, and that emerging on the inner side it
proceeds to make a beeline, without a curve, across this vast mountain
amphitheater for a distance of fifty-six miles. While crookedness is a
wonder elsewhere, it is straightness that is a wonder here, and this unwonted
tangent is deliberately mentioned as a curious thing. The grades
immediately precedent were two hundred and eleven feet to the mile,
and the look downward and backward through Poncha Pass was something
as indescribable as any scene in Colorado. But it may be added
that this is the longest stretch of straight railroad track, not alone in
Colorado, but in the world.

On this circle route lies the famous Toltec Gorge, where the train crosses
the range at an elevation of 10,015 feet. The line passes the corner of the
Ute and Apache Indian reservations, and the aborigine has never lost his
interest in the still inexplicable power that was the principal indirect cause
of his being placed at last in this corner of the realm he once owned. He
sits in the sun and waits for the train.

38

There is a place where the line is laid on a shelf in a cañon that is five
hundred feet from the bottom and five hundred feet from the top, and
where the cost of construction for a single mile was $115,000.

At Mancos station the ethnologically inclined may stop and visit the
ruins of the cliff dwellers in Mancos Cañon. Rico, Lost Cañon, the
Valley of the Dolores, Rio de Las Animas Perdidas—“the River of the
Lost Souls”—the queer, sharp pinnacles known as the Needle Mountains,
Sultan Mountain, Lizard Head Pass, Trout Lake, the celebrated piece of
engineering known as Ophir Loop, the Black Cañon, are all places on
this “circle” journey.

Bathing Scene at Glenwood Springs—A “Chute.”

The mines and mining interests of Colorado are immense. They form
a special feature, and about them there is already an extensive literature.
It is the richest mineral region in the world, a fact illustrated by the ease
with which it can turn from silver to gold, calling itself the “Silver State”
for a period of years, and producing in a year immediately succeeding
more than thirty millions of gold. Through all these wanderings, in every
nook and corner, are the mines. The country is known truly and in
detail by but one class—the prospectors. Thorough experts in mining
are found in every walk in life. Information in detail would fill a space
ten times as large as can be given here. The two largest mining camps,

39

Leadville and Cripple Creek, are both easy of access by rail from Denver,
and, while as towns they possess features that are unique, there is little in
them outside the lines of average American citizenship and human nature,
except the vast interests to which they are exclusively devoted. The home
is there as elsewhere; the school, the church and the average man and
woman. The frontier story has been told and is out of date. The community
of a great mining center is not so strange, nor apparently half so
extraordinary in its methods, as that which clusters daily around the shrine
in the Chicago Board of Trade.

To the miner, the farmer and the cattle raiser of Colorado the scenery
has in time naturally become as is Niagara to him who lives with the
thunder of the cataract always in his ears. It is to those to whom these
wonders are not a part of daily life that they appeal. The interest involved
in industrial Colorado is immense. The capital involved mounts easily
into millions. But it is a separate topic, interesting only to business,
appealing not at all to the man and woman whose cares and toils are
lessened, whose lives are strengthened by the touch of nature once a year;
for whom, since the first railroad line was laid across the plains, there has
existed no outing like that amid the Springs and peaks and pines of Colorado.

A Full Cargo—Children and Donkey at Manitou.

40

Life out of doors—Summer camping party in Cascade Cañon, near Manitou.

41

CHAPTER VI.

Hunting and Fishing in Colorado.

One region after another in this country has been proclaimed to be, and
was in its day, “A Hunter’s Paradise.” One after the other these places
have come under the dominion of the plow until now the situation of that
poor man who wants to do above all others that thing he does not have to
do at all, is deplorable. In the matter of fishing the question is not so
exigent. In that of hunting the question that is oftenest unanswered when
asked is “where shall I go to find something to kill; something, too, that I
may fancy will kill
me
if I don’t kill
it
.”

Now, if Colorado is a hunting country at all, it is one most of whose
preserves can be nearly approached in a Pullman car. The climate, even
in midwinter, is mild. There is always a town, a mine, a ranch, somewhere
within tramping distance; somewhere to go, something to eat, a fire, good
women, hospitable men. There is no Nimrod so hearty that these are not
to him valuable considerations; if not in the morning, at least at night.

It may seem almost too much to say that nearly every prominent
scenery place in the state is contiguous to good hunting. “Over the range”
is always, in certain respects at least, another world. There are numbers
of men here who habitually prospect in summer and hunt in winter. There
is not one of these who does not know where large game is to be found.
The trouble is not so much with the place as it is with the unaccustomed
man. Find your appropriate and mountain-accustomed man as guide and
you will get the game—if you can hit a gray or a light brown spot four
hundred yards or such a matter away. It will hardly pay to come to these
mountains in order to learn, for the first time, how to shoot at a mark, or
how to go hungry because it was not touched.

“Youth’s daring spirit, manhood’s fire,

Firm hand and eagle eye,

Must he acquire who would aspire

To see the gray boar die.”

The forests still cover a large portion of Colorado. Many of these lying
away from other interests so far, are almost as silent as they were in the
beginning. They are the natural covert for elk, deer, antelope, the mountain
sheep and a variety of smaller game. Any prospector will tell one that
there is nothing more common than the fresh bear track near the stream,
looking like the footprint of a barefoot negro baby. All mountain men

42

encounter droves of elk and deer. Farmers will tell you where they think
they are, because they have often seen them there.

For many sportsmen, the northwestern and parts of the northern portions
of the state are the best large-game hunting grounds; Routt, Grand
and Garfield counties, and the region of which Estes Park is the center.
Parts of this northern region are more easily reached by the Burlington’s
line from Denver northwest to Lyons than by any other. The region of the
foothills, the land between plain and mountain, and including both, is the
natural home of the elk. It is in the more outlying regions, of course, that
the big shy game now live. Once, in the days of Indian occupation, all
Colorado was a hunting field, perhaps the best known. Natural fastnesses,
plenty of food and a mild climate made it so. The encroachments of civilization
have naturally restricted the field, but with the result that there is
now more game in the places they still occupy than there was in former
times. This unoccupied region is still in the aggregate, and notwithstanding
all the railroad lines, as large as the entire state of New York. One
would be illy occupied in prescribing given
localities to an accomplished hunter under
these circumstances. Every resident
hunter knows, if he would
always tell, of half a dozen good
hunting fields.

Pike’s Peak
as seen from
Briarhurst,
near Manitou.

In brief, it may be said that
there is still game all over Colorado
except on the plains, and
there the jackrabbit lives in large
numbers. In localities where
there is fine fishing every summer,
such as the Gunnison River,
near Montrose or Delta, there is
also fine deer hunting in the season,
and that is a region largely interested
in farming and grazing.
Or an inquirer will be rewarded with valuable
pointers about the region of the mildest climate
in the state; the nooks and valleys on either side
of the San Luis Park. A little inquiry developed,
perhaps, after the employment of a companion

43

or guide, who is undoubtedly necessary to a stranger, will elicit facts about
the hunting grounds and their possibilities that a man might wander over
the state for a year and not discover for himself. The best hunting here
and elsewhere, is obtained only by him who departs deliberately out of
civilization for a period, lives in a cabin, does nothing but hunt while he
is thus engaged, and stays long enough to learn the country and the haunts
of the beasts for whose life he thirsts. It is not now so easy as it was, even
in Africa. The time is coming when it will be a lost art.

People who hunt in Colorado unite in the opinion that the choicest hunting
grounds of the Utes were those wilder places that still remain unoccupied.
Among such places the country back of De Beque, a town on the
line of the Colorado Midland, is prominently mentioned. North of this
place lie the Book Cliffs, and through these wind narrow gorges that at
places widen out into little parks. There are in these never-failing springs.
The region is of large extent, full of trees, and the natural covert of wild
animals. A late writer states that he has seen in this region in one morning
and counted three hundred and fifty deer. There is also on the mesas
an abundance of quail, grouse and sage hens.

In fishing, the case is slightly different. The watercourses of Colorado
comprise eight principal rivers, which flow from their sources in the mountains
in all directions, increasing in volume from almost countless tributaries.
In all these streams the mountain trout is a native. For many years trout
fishing has been the principal pastime of the people. The trout is a fish
that is particular in his habits to a degree almost absurd, and when he has
a place he usually stays there, with an occasional change from pools to
riffles, until he grows too large, or until he becomes disgusted with the
society of intruders in the persons of large fishes, many of whom have a
taste for him when he is young. Like other fishes, they are deaf but they
can see quickly, and are known to be gifted with an acuteness above the
average. And yet they are great fools, shortsighted and capricious, biting
a certain kind of bait one day and refusing it the next, always hunted first
by the angler, always a little hard to get, yet caught by the thousands.

But it is only a question of time when the native trout will have disappeared
from Colorado waters. Since the propagation of the California
rainbow trout in these streams, and the eastern brook trout, he has in many
localities already disappeared. The exchange is not a detriment. The
rainbow trout grows to a great size here, specimens weighing twelve pounds
being often caught. It is rapid in growth, game, and very fecund.

44

Great care is taken in the preservation
of the fishing waters. A notable example
of this is the South Platte, one of the ideal
trout streams of the state. The railroad
company plants here each season
about two hundred thousand young
trout. Platte Cañon, a few hours’ ride
from Denver is a favorite ground.
The Gunnison River, east of Grand
Junction, is another famous fishing
stream. There are a great many smaller
brooks and streams. Every mountain
stream that has not had its waters spoiled
by tailings and the refuse of smelters has
fish in it. As a rule, the further away from
the haunts of many anglers one goes, the
more fish there are to be caught. The
hunting grounds are fishing grounds as
well. The broad statement may be made
that no other region of the world has so
many streams where game fish naturally
live, and that with continual stocking and
great care by the railways and the state, the supply has not perceptibly
diminished. Many streams are spoiled; many others still remain. They
are well known. The accustomed angler knows his fishing place when he
sees it, and besides the places where everybody goes he can easily find a
domain where he and the fishes can have it out together. There is a United
States fish hatchery located at Leadville, and the game laws of the state
are well enforced. There is not the essence of truth behind any statement
that the days of sport in Colorado are at an end.

Waterfall in Thompson’s Cañon,
Estes Park.

The statutes of the state protecting game permit the killing of game
birds from August 15 to November 1; waterfowl from September 1 to
May 1. Deer and elk may be killed from August 1 to November 1. The
killing of buffalo and mountain sheep is prohibited. It is lawful to take
fish with hook and line from June 1 to December 1. Netting, poison and
explosives are prohibited.

45

How to Go to Colorado.

There is perhaps an impression in the public mind that is an inheritance
from the old time—that the long road across the plains is a dreary
monotony—that the “Great American Desert,” as the region between the
Missouri River and the Rocky Mountains was called until recent years, is
an uninteresting waste, tiresome to traverse. But a surprise is in store for
anyone having this picture in his mind, for the fact is that in the Nebraska
of to-day is found a continuation of that exquisite panorama of farm-land
scenery that is passed while traveling through Illinois and Iowa, or Northern
Missouri. The journey is one full of interest from the beginning until the
climax is reached, when on arriving within seventy-five miles of Denver the
first glimpse is seen of the great rocky range of snow-capped mountains,
which seem to stand as a barrier to further progress toward the west.
Again, to one unaccustomed to extensive travel, the distance from the
Great Lakes to Denver, for instance, seems very great, but when one stops
to consider that it was only a few months ago that a special train over the
Burlington Route covered the 1,025 miles from Chicago in 1,047 minutes,
without unusual effort, and in the regular course of business, the long
journey seems shortened and glorious Colorado appears to be as it is,
easily accessible.

There are several railroads reaching from eastern territory to Colorado,
but none which have the many advantages of the Burlington Route. This
road owns its own tracks from Chicago, Peoria and St. Louis to Denver, and
it has a world-wide reputation for the excellence of its equipment, the high
standard of its dining-car service, and the regularity with which its trains
make schedule time. For the individual bent on either pleasure or business,
it is the most desirable from every point of view, and it appeals in particular
to those entrusted with the selection of an official route for delegates
attending a convention, for the reason that the Burlington’s system of lines
reaches all the principal cities between the Great Lakes and the Rocky
Mountains, thus enabling the entire delegation to concentrate and travel
together under a contract made with a single railroad. A glance at the
map will demonstrate this.

Take the Burlington Route to Denver; it is the best line.

46

Green Lake, near Georgetown—One of the highest pieces of water in the world that can be visited.

47

The World’s Record.

1,025 miles in 1,047 minutes.

On the morning of February 15, 1897, a telegram was received at Chicago
from H. J. Mayham, asking for a special train from Chicago to Denver.
No details could be arranged until Mr. Mayham’s arrival at 9.15 a. m. Not
until then was it known that Mr. Mayham was hurrying to the bedside of
his dying son. Instructions were hurriedly given to get an engine ready,
and at ten o’clock a private car, attached to an engine which had just
brought in a suburban train and was most available, left the Union Passenger
Station with instructions merely to “make a good run.”

To Burlington, Iowa, the distance is 206 miles, and the trip to this point
was made in 228 minutes, including seven stops. After leaving Burlington
for the run across Iowa nothing of moment occurred until after leaving
Creston. Then it was discovered that the engine truck was running hot,
but nevertheless the 36 miles to Villisca was made in 34 minutes, and then
it was found necessary to telegraph ahead to Red Oak, 15 miles away, and
order another engine to take the train to the Missouri River. These last 15
miles were made in 15 minutes. Lincoln, the capital of Nebraska, was
reached at 8.11 p. m., Hastings, 638 miles from Chicago, at 10.03 p. m. The
run from Hastings to Oxford, Neb., 78 miles, was made in 75 minutes, and
from Oxford to McCook, 54 miles, in 51 minutes. The remainder of the
trip through eastern Colorado and up the gradual but very long grade into
Denver was accomplished without incident, and the train arrived, after the
usual delays at crossings, at 3.53 a. m., mountain time. From the Union
Passenger Station, Chicago, to the Union Depot, Denver, a distance of 1,025
miles, the time was eighteen hours and fifty-three minutes—breaking the
world’s record for long-distance running.

Two features in connection with this achievement make it unique. First,
no preparation of any kind was made for the run. Forty minutes after the
order was given for the train it started, and was handled all the way through
in the ordinary manner and with no idea of making a record. An emergency
had arisen, and the aim of the operating department was simply to
give a patron of the road, who paid for it, the best service possible under
the circumstances. Second, it so happened that all of the division superintendents
and chief dispatchers on the C., B. & Q. were in Chicago attending
a meeting, and the details of the trip were, therefore, entirely in the hands
of their subordinates. Both of these facts emphasize the perfect state of
discipline which exists, and which made it possible to accomplish such a
run without a hitch or impediment of any kind.

48

Burlington Route Through Train Service

From Chicago.

To Minneapolis and St. Paul
—Two trains daily. Connection is made at
St. Paul in Union Depot for Duluth and for all points in the northwest,
including Puget Sound.

To Omaha, Denver and California
—Three trains daily. Connection is
made at Denver in Union Depot with the Denver & Rio Grande R. R. for
all points in Colorado, Salt Lake City, Ogden and California. Personally
conducted excursions to California, in through special cars, every week.

To Montana, Yellowstone Park and the Pacific Coast
, via Omaha, Lincoln
and the Black Hills—One train daily. Passes by the Custer Battlefield.
Connection is made at Billings, Mont., with the Northern Pacific Ry. for
Yellowstone Park, Helena, Butte and the Pacific Coast.

To Kansas City, St. Joseph, Leavenworth and Atchison
—Two trains
daily. Connection is made at Kansas City in Union Depot for all points
in the southwest.

To Dallas, Ft. Worth, Houston, Galveston and San Antonio
, via Hannibal
and the Missouri, Kansas & Texas Ry.—Two trains daily. Connection
is made for all points in Texas.

From St. Louis.

To Minneapolis and St. Paul
—Three trains daily; one via east side
Mississippi River and two via west side Mississippi River. Connection is
made at St. Paul in Union Depot for all points in the northwest.

To Kansas City, St. Joseph, Leavenworth and Atchison
—Two trains
daily. Connection is made at Kansas City in Union Depot for all points
in the southwest.

To Lincoln, Denver and California
—One train daily, via St. Joseph
and Lincoln. Connection is made at Denver in Union Depot with the
Denver & Rio Grande R. R. for all points in Colorado, Salt Lake City,
Ogden and California.

To Montana, Yellowstone Park and the Pacific Coast
, via St. Joseph,
Lincoln and the Black Hills—One train daily. Passes by the Custer
Battlefield. Connection is made at Billings, Mont., with the Northern
Pacific Ry. for Yellowstone Park, Helena, Butte and the Pacific Coast.

Note
—All through trains on the Burlington Lines are equipped with Vestibuled
Pullman Palace Sleeping Cars, Reclining Chair Cars (seats free) and Burlington Route
Dining Cars (meals served on the European plan). Some trains are equipped also with
Pullman Compartment Sleeping Cars and Composite Cars, fitted with smoking room, sideboard
and compartments for card players.

POOLE BROS. CHICAGO.

Burlington Route
High-resolution Version

BIRD’S-EYE MAP

OF

COLORADO

SHOWING

TOURISTS’ RESORTS.
High-resolution Version

Transcriber’s Notes

Silently corrected a few typos.

Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.

In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by _underscores_.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Colorado Outings, by James Steele

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLORADO OUTINGS ***

***** This file should be named 59923-h.htm or 59923-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/9/2/59923/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.