The Project Gutenberg eBook, David Morgan, the Welsh Jacobite, by William
Llewellin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: David Morgan, the Welsh Jacobite
a contribution to the history of Jacobitism in Wales

Author: William Llewellin

Release Date: May 17, 2020  [eBook #62163]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID MORGAN, THE WELSH JACOBITE***

Transcribed from the 1862 R. Mason edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org

DAVID MORGAN,

THE WELSH JACOBITE;

A
CONTRIBUTION TO

THE HISTORY OF JACOBITISM

IN WALES.

BY

WILLIAM LLEWELLIN, F.G.S., F.G.H.S.,

&c., &c., &c.

Reprinted
from the “Cambrian Journal,” 1861.

TENBY:

PRINTED BY R. MASON, HIGH STREET.

1862.

p. 3
DAVID
MORGAN,

THE WELSH JACOBITE.

“Although my lands are fair and wide,

Its here no longer I must bide;

Yet my last hoof, and horn, and hide,

I’ll gie
to bonnie Charlie.

“Although my heart is unco sair,

And lies fu’ lowly in its lair,

Yet the last drap of blude that’s there,

I’ll gie
for bonnie Charlie.”

Jacobite Ballad
.

One
of the most romantic and
spirit-stirring episodes in English History is that presented to
us by the last effort of the partisans of the expelled House of
Stuart to place the representative of the exiled family on the
throne of his ancestors.

The Rebellion of 1745 has been acknowledged universally to
have been remarkable for the interesting incidents, and romantic
adventures, to which it gave rise; and the annals of history do
not furnish examples of greater personal sacrifices, more exalted
heroism, and chivalrous devotion, than were exhibited during that
momentous struggle.

p. 4
In these
peaceful times, and blessed with institutions that afford the
fullest security for the preservation of our civil and religious
liberties, it is difficult to conceive the stormy struggles to
which the country was subjected, in the efforts of our
forefathers, amid contending factions, to secure and maintain the
liberties which we now enjoy, and to hand them down to us
unimpaired.  Still more difficult is it to realize the fact,
that very little more than a century has passed since this
country was the scene of a fierce civil war, in which members of
the same family were arrayed against each other in hostile
conflict, and, during the progress of which, and of the ruthless
and vindictive executions that followed it, the bravest blood of
Britain,—that of the devoted, though mistaken, adherents of
the Stuarts,—was poured out like water on their native
soil.

The circumstances out of which this great conflict originated
may be thus briefly detailed.  The continued infraction of
the laws by a systematic indifference to every principle of
legality, the violation of the liberties of the people, the
brutal cruelty and senseless obstinacy, the persistent
determination to deprive the Episcopal and Presbyterian Churches
of their rights and privileges, and to restore the domination of
the Roman Catholic Church, which characterized the proceedings of
James II. during his short and most unhappy reign, completely
alienated the affections of his subjects, and eventually led the
best and greatest men of the country to seek the aid of the
Prince of Orange, afterwards William III., against the tyranny
and oppression to which they were subjected.

The flight of the King, and the successful accomplishment, and
glorious results of the Revolution of 1688, speedily followed
that movement, and the stable and permanent advantages, and
constitutional reforms, that subsequently had their origin in the
Bill of Rights, were thus secured to us.

While experiencing those manifold benefits, and realizing the
blessed results of the solid guarantees for the maintenance and
extension of their liberties, that sprung
p. 5
out of the
expulsion of James II., and when there were numbers of living
men, who had not only been witnesses, but were also victims of
his oppression and misrule, it is passing strange that such a
feeling should have existed among any considerable body of the
people as could have rendered possible the Rebellions of 1715 and
1745, and have enlisted in favour of the Stuarts, and enrolled
among their enthusiastic adherents, many men of high position,
and extensive territorial possessions.  But, though at the
period of the outbreak of 1715, only 27 years had elapsed, and
not more than 57 years had passed, when the Rebellion of 1745
occurred, since the Revolution, the resentment, the sense of
wrong, and the many painful impressions produced on the public
mind by the occurrences of James II.’s fated and luckless
reign, though not wholly effaced, had unquestionably been very
considerably subdued and obliterated.  The sons and
grandsons of the brave and devoted Cavaliers, who fought and bled
for their King in the bloody fields of Naseby and Worcester, and
who sacrificed wealth and life in the royalist cause, clung
tenaciously to the recollections associated with those unhappy
days, and still sympathised with the fallen fortunes of the
Stuarts.

A considerable amount of discontent also existed in the
country, occasioned by the impolitic and unseemly preference
shown by the two first Georges for their Hanoverian subjects,
which partiality, natural as it may have been, was, in a King of
England, excessively indiscreet, and, by its undisguised, and
even occasionally ostentatious manifestations, calculated to
excite among his subjects feelings of considerable
dissatisfaction and discontent.  Those monarchs were
likewise known to possess a very imperfect acquaintance, which
they made no efforts to extend, with the language, laws, and
constitution of England; and, prior to the outbreak of the last
Rebellion, in 1745, the unpopularity of George II. had become so
decided as to render it extremely probable that a movement, well
conceived and skilfully carried out, for the restoration of the
old dynasty, might be successful.
p. 6
For, throughout the country, and even
in London, the people appear to have formed a highly favourable
estimate of the Pretender, (of whom zealous Jacobites had spread
the most glowing accounts,) and to have entertained a higher
regard for his personal character than they felt for that of
George.  Indeed, had there not existed the apprehension
that, with their restoration, the hereditary passion for
arbitrary power that had ever characterized the Stuarts would
once more have manifested itself, there were few patriotic
Englishmen who would not gladly have given their adherence to
them, and so have relieved themselves of a dynasty that had not
from the first been particularly popular, and that was then very
generally regarded with contempt and dislike.

The restoration of the Stuarts, although not actively promoted
by the majority of the people, was not, however, regarded with
any feelings approaching abhorrence, nor did they even extend to
very serious dislike.  Several of the most distinguished
noblemen and gentlemen were already zealous Jacobites, while many
more regarded the movements and conspiracies in favour of the
Stuarts either with favour or indifference.

The relations that existed between the great landowners and
their tenants and dependents so largely partook, even at that
comparatively recent period, of the spirit and characteristics of
the feudal system, that few of the territorial families would
have experienced much difficulty in gathering together, and
bringing into the field, very formidable bodies of armed
retainers, in behalf of any cause which they had espoused, and
desired to uphold.  This, however, was more especially the
case in Scotland and Wales.

In the latter country, as in Scotland, the Jacobites were very
numerous, and the loyalty that had been the characteristic of the
Welsh people in the troubled times of the great Rebellion, and
which made Wales almost the last rallying place of the unhappy
Charles Stuart, and his devoted followers, still existed among
the Welsh people, and rendered them ready to undergo the greatest
personal
p.
7
sacrifices, or to encounter any perils, in upholding the
cause of his unfortunate descendant.
[7]

Had Charles Stuart followed the counsels that were freely
urged upon him during the ill-judged retreat from Derby, and
marched his forces into Wales, it is probable that a formidable
rising would have occurred in that country, and that, if not
ultimately successful, the struggle would have been greatly
prolonged, and have proved of a still more serious and sanguinary
character.

But, had that course been adopted, and failure ensued, several
of the great Welsh landed proprietors would have been involved in
the ruin that overtook so many of the leading Scottish Jacobites,
and their heads would most assuredly have fallen on the
scaffold.  As it was, the Duke of Beaufort, with hereditary
devotion to the Stuarts, and Sir Watkin Wynn, were so seriously
compromised as to place them for a time in considerable
danger.

The infamous Secretary Murray, of Broughton, revealed the
whole of the particulars of the Jacobite intrigues and
conspiracies that had existed since the year 1740, and made such
criminatory statements, with respect to the complicity of the
Duke, and Sir Watkin, as clearly proved their active
participation in the plots that had preceded and led to the
Rebellion.  The law, however, required that, in cases of
treason,
two
witnesses should depose to the facts on which
the charge was founded; and it was consequently found
impracticable to proceed against them on Murray’s
traitorous testimony.  It is, moreover, suspected that the
king and the government felt indisposed to have them impeached,
fearing that the prosecution of men so powerful and influential
might give rise to serious disturbances, and cause a further
outbreak of a still more dangerous character than that which had
been so recently suppressed.

In addition to the Duke of Beaufort, and Sir Watkin Wynn, many
of the leading noblemen and gentlemen,
p. 8
throughout North and South Wales, were
intimately associated with the intrigues of the Jacobites.
Among those most deeply involved, and who made the greatest
sacrifices for the cause of the Stuarts, was William, Marquis of
Powis, who followed James II. into France, and was by him created
Duke of Powis, and so designated at the Court of St.
Germain’s.  The fourth daughter of this nobleman, Lady
Winifred Herbert, became the wife of the Earl of Nithsdale; and
the remarkable devotion and heroic courage with which she
devised, and successfully accomplished, the escape of her beloved
husband, when left for execution, entitle her to an exalted place
among the heroines of Wales.

The Earl had been one of the most prominent leaders of the
Rebellion in 1715; and, after its suppression, was apprehended,
tried, and sentenced to death.  His devoted wife exhausted
every effort to obtain his pardon, and sought, by the most
strenuous and piteous appeals, to move the King to mercy.
Finding, however, that her prayers and entreaties were
disregarded, and that no other hope remained to her, this
dauntless woman, undismayed by difficulties and dangers before
which most hearts would have quailed, and sank into despair,
wrought out a most heroic scheme for effecting the escape of the
Earl from the Tower, and had the inexpressible happiness of
releasing him from his prison, and placing him far beyond the
reach of his pursuers.  In doing this, her own safety, and
even life, were seriously imperilled; but, by the interposition
of influential individuals attached to the Court, a merciful view
was taken of her case, and she was eventually permitted to pass
over to the continent, to rejoin the husband she had saved.
To Welshmen it will be a gratifying fact that, associated with
her in those efforts to preserve the Earl from the scaffold, and
all essential to her success, were her “dear Evans,”
a maid or companion, and a Mrs. Morgan, both of whom appear to
have been faithful Welsh dependents of the family of Powis, and
wholly devoted to the Countess.

Though the precise extent of his complicity have
p. 9
escaped my
inquiries, and I have failed to obtain clear evidence on the
subject, I find it generally asserted, throughout the district in
which he resided, that the great landed proprietor, Mr. Lewis, of
the Van, Caerphilly,—“Ysguier Lewis gwych o’r
Van,”—from whom the Marquis of Bute, and the Baroness
Windsor, inherit their great estates in Glamorganshire, was
discovered to have participated in one of the numerous plots for
the restoration of the Stuarts, and to have had a fine imposed
upon him of £10,000.  Such a sum in those days would
have been accounted a large one; and to procure it, a large
extent of land, in the vicinity of Merthyr-Tydfil, (then a humble
village containing less than a dozen houses,) and elsewhere, had
to be sold; and it is said that, among the properties that were
then disposed of, were the Court, Mardy, and other estates, that
have subsequently proved of very great value.

The uncompromising Jacobite feeling of one of the old Welsh
proprietors is displayed in an anecdote that has been related of
Sir Charles Kemys, of Cefn Mabley.  It is said of him that,
during his travels on the continent, he paid a visit to Hanover,
and was treated with marked regard by the Elector; and, it is
supposed, that he owed that distinction to the lessons which he
gave to the Court and Sovereign in the British accomplishments of
drinking and smoking tobacco.  Shortly after his elevation
to the throne of England, George expressed a strong desire to see
his former friend, Sir Charles Kemys, and, as he persisted in the
wish, he was informed by the courtiers that Sir Charles was not
well affected to the present dynasty.  “Poo!
Poo!” said the King, “tell him he must come up, I
long to smoke a pipe with him.”  This command having
been conveyed to Sir Charles, he is said to have declined the
invitation in those terms,—“I should be happy to
smoke a pipe with him as Elector of Hanover, but I can’t
think of it as King of England.”
[9]

The traditions that still linger among the Welsh hills
p. 10
show that
Jacobite principles were not confined to the landowners, but also
prevailed among the farmers and peasants.  Of those
traditionary stories, one is told of an old Welsh farmer,
residing at a farm called Pen Craig Fargoed, in the parish of
Gelligare, Glamorganshire, and who appears to have been a devoted
adherent of the Stuarts.  A witty fellow in the
neighbourhood, rather remarkable for his acuteness, and, withal,
somewhat addicted to rhyming, to meet some pressing necessity,
had borrowed a guinea from his neighbour, “yr hên
bapist,” and, on meeting him subsequently, without having
the power to repay him the loan, with the view of propitiating
him, addressed him in the following terms, and, it is said,
greatly pleased him, and obtained all the indulgence that he
sought:—

“Tri ffeth ’rwy yn ei archi,

Cael echwyn am y guni,

A chael Pretendwr ar y faink

A chael bath Ffraink y dali.”

Which, for the benefit of those unacquainted with the Welsh
language, may be thus translated:—

“Three things do I desire,

To have indulgence for the guinea;

And have the Pretender on the throne;

And have French money to pay with.”

In North Wales the Jacobites appear to have been numerous and
powerful.  A social meeting that existed very recently, if
it does not still exist, at Wrexham, and known as the
“Cycle,” was originally a secret assembly of the
Jacobites, established in Denbighshire, for the object of
upholding and promoting the pretensions of the young Pretender,
Prince Charles Edward, to the throne of this country.  The
rules of this society, to which the signatures of several of its
leading members were appended, were published, about thirty years
back, in the
Cambrian Quarterly Journal
;
[10]
and, as that work possessed a limited
circulation, and has now become scarce,
p. 11
its
reproduction may interest many persons to whom it would otherwise
be unknown.  This list of the names of the members is one of
the earliest known.  More recent ones are stated to have
been drawn up in the form of a round robin; which, it is
suspected, was adopted to prevent the possibility of either of
the members being proceeded against as the principal of an
assembly that was clearly of a treasonable character.

“We, whose names are underwritten, do
promise at y
e
time and place to our names respectively
affixed, and to observe the rules following, viz.

Imp
rs
.  Every member of this society shall,
for default of his appearance, submit to be censur’d, and
shall thereupon be censur’d by the judgm
t
of the
society.

2
ndly
.  Every member y
t
cannot come
shall be obliged to send notice of his non-appearance by 12 of
the clock at noon, together with his reason in writing, otherwise
his plea shall not excuse him, if within the compass of fifteen
miles from the place of meeting.

3
rdly
.  Each member obliges himself to have
dinner upon the table by 12 o clock
[11]
at noon, from
Michaelmas to Lady-day, and, from Lady-day till Michaelmas, at 1
of the clock.

4
thly
.  The respective masters of the places
of meeting oblige themselves to take down in writing each
default, and to deliver in the same at the general meeting.

5
thly
.  Every member shall keep a copy of
these articles by him, to prevent plea of mistake.

6
thly
.  It is agreed y
t
a general
meeting shall be held by all y
e
subscribers at the
house of Daniel Porter, Jun
r
. holden in Wrexham, on
the 1st day of May, 1724, by 11 of y
e
clock in the
forenoon, and there to dine; and to determine upon all points
relating to and according to the sense and meaning of those
articles.

1723 (Signed)

Thos. Puleston, May 21
st
(eldest son of Sir Roger
Puleston, of Emral).

Rich. Clayton, June 11
th
.

Eubule Lloyd, (of Penyllan,) July 2
nd
.

Robt
t
. Ellis, July 23
rd
.

W. W
ms
. Wynn, (of Wynnstay,) Aug
t
.
13
th

Jno. Puleston, (of Pickhill,) Sep. 3
rd
.

Tho
s
. Eyton, (of Leeswood,) Sep. 24
th
.

p.
12
W
m
. Edwards, Oct. 15
th

Thomas Holland, Nov. 6
th
.

Ken Eyton, (of Eyton,) Nov. 26
th
.

Phil. Egerton, (of Oulton,) Dec. 17
th
.

Jno. Robinson, (of Gwersyllt,) Jan
y
.
8
th
.

Geo. Shackerly, (of Gwersyllt,) Jan
y
.
29
th
.

Rob
t
. Davies, (of Gwyssany,) Feb. 19
th
.

John Puleston, (of Hafod y Wern,) March 13
th
.

Broughton Whitehall, (of Broughton,) April 3
rd
.

W
m
. Hanmer, April 24
th
, 1724.”

In the second volume of the same Journal,
[12]
a tale was published anonymously, that
exhibited considerable ability, and was especially interesting
from the circumstance of its introducing the hero, Meredith
Alynton, to the members of the Cycle Club, that was supposed to
have assembled for one of its meetings at Wynnstay, the princely
residence of Sir Watkin Wynn.  In the description of this
scene, the author has very agreeably and skilfully blended fact
with fiction, and has introduced into this portion of the tale
two remarkably interesting songs, that are stated to have been
veritable Jacobite relics, and which were then printed for the
first time.  It is believed that they were written specially
for the Cycle Club; and, at the time of their publication, the
MSS. had been in the possession of Owen Ellis, Esq., a descendant
of one of the original members of the Club, and his ancestors,
for upwards of a century.  As those songs are curious, and
very little known, they are here reprinted.

OF QUARRELS, AND CHANGES, AND CHANGELINGS, I SING.

Of quarrels, and changes, and changelings, I
sing,

Of courtiers and cuckolds, too; God save the King!

Now Munster’s fat grace lies in somebody’s place,

And hopeful and so forth are turned out to grass;

O, G—e, thou’st done wisely to make such a pother

Between one German w—e and the son of another.

Now that son of another, so stubborn and
rusty,

Is turn’d out of doors, and thy favors, most justly,

p. 13
Since he
was so unwise as his child to baptize,

He may e’en thank himself if you bastardize.

For there ne’er would have been all this wrangling work,

If, instead of a Christian, he had bred him a Turk.

The youth that so long had dwelt under thy
roof,

Might sure have found out, by many a good proof,

That you ne’er were so mild as to be reconciled,

If once you’re provok’d, to man, woman, or child.

But, alas, for poor England, what hopes can be had

From a prince not so wise as to know his own dad!

Were he twice more thy son than e’er
anyone thought him,

There are forty and forty good reasons to out him,

For he trod on the toe of a gallant young beau,

And made it so sore that he hardly could go;

And unless for this due correction he feels,

Who knows but he soon may tread on thy own heels!

Of your heels, oh! take care, let no one abuse
’em,

For it may be you’ll soon have occasion to use
’em,

For if J—y should land, you’d soon understand

That one pair of heels is worth two pair of hands;

And then the pert whipster will find, I suppose,

Other work for his feet than to tread on folk’s toes.

ROBIN JOHN CLARK.

Ye true bacchanals come to Ned of the Dales,

And there let’s carouse oe’r a butt of
strong liquor,

Bring with you no shirkers, nor friends to usurpers,

But souls that will drink till their pulses beat
quicker.

May the courtier who snarls at the friend of Prince C—s,

And eke who our houses and windows made dark,

Ne’er pilfer much treasure, nor taste of such pleasure;

Then hark to the chorus of Robin John Clark.

May each bung his eye till the vessel’s
quite dry,

And drink to the low’ring extravagant
taxes;

For the spirit of Britain, by foreigners spit on,

Quite cold by oppression and tyranny waxes.

Then here’s to the toast, tho’ the battle was
lost,

And he who refuses a traytor we’ll mark:

Here’s a health to the prince, not meaning from whence,

For thus sings the chorus of Robin John Clark.

Then fill up another to the good duke his
brother,

Not meaning that blood-thirsty cruel assassin;

p. 14
May the
Scotch partisans recollect their stout clans,

Their force, twenty thousand in number
surpassing;

May they enter Whitehall, old St. James’s, and all,

While the troops are for safety encamp’d in
the park;

May kind heaven inspire each volley and fire,

For thus sings the chorus of Robin John Clark.

Hand in hand let us joyn against such as
combine,

And dare to enslave with vile usurpation;

Whenever time offers, we’ll open our coffers,

And fight to retrieve the bad state of the
nation.

We’ll not only drink, but we’ll act as we think,

We’ll take the brown musket, the sword, and
the dirk,

Thro’ all sorts of weather, we’ll trade it
together,

So God bless the chorus of Robin John Clark.

In a note to this tale it is stated that tradition reports
that the young Pretender visited the Principality prior to the
Rebellion; but this statement is scarcely credible, nor is there
any evidence in support of its truth.  It is, however,
indisputable, that he reckoned the greater number of the wealthy
landowners of Wales among his adherents, and one of the original
projects of his army, in its advance from Scotland, was that of
marching into Wales, where the people, and even the clergy,
[14a]
were well known to be warmly devoted
to the Stuarts, while the character of the country was considered
to be favourable to the desultory mode of warfare practised by
the Highlanders.  Anticipating that such a course would be
adopted, several of the leading gentry had prepared themselves to
join him, and many of them had left their houses, and were
actually on their way to meet him,
[14b]
when the
mortifying intelligence reached them of the retreat from
Derby.  At that period, the influence of the gentry of Wales
over their tenantry, and the peasantry generally, was very great,
and it is extremely probable that an advance
p. 15
into Wiles
would have secured to the Pretender an immense accession to his
forces.  The unexpected retreat, however, prevented any
rising among the Welsh, and the adherents of the Stuarts were
thus saved from the ruin in which most probably they would
otherwise have been eventually involved.  They were fully
prepared to risk both life and estate in the cause of the prince
whom they loved, though that prince, like other Stuarts, may,
after all, have proved unworthy of their sacrifices and
devotion.  Tradition states that, for many years subsequent
to the memorable Forty-Five,
[15a]
the Welsh squires,
at their convivial meetings, were accustomed to discuss and
dispute as to the share which each had taken in the movement, and
the respective distances that intervened between them and the
prince’s army, when the news of the retreat reached them,
and compelled them to return to their homes.  In a letter
written many months subsequently,
[15b]
the young
Pretender, while referring incidently to Mr. Barry, states that
he “arrived at Derby two days after I parted.  He had
been sent by Sir Watkin Wynn to assure me, in the name of my
friends, that they were ready to join me in what manner I
pleased.”

The prince himself is said to have been most anxious to
proceed into Wales;
[15c]
for at Derby, when
the retreat was under discussion, and all his arguments in favour
of an advance to London had proved unavailing, he, at last,
“as a middle course, proposed that they should march into
Wales, to give their partizans in that country an opportunity of
joining.”
[15d]

Foremost and boldest among those who contended for a forward
movement, and counselled the advance upon Loudon, was David
Morgan.  He determinedly opposed the retreat, and clearly
foresaw its disastrous consequences.  W hen he found that
the Scottish commanders had actually commenced the retrograde
movement, and that the troops
p. 16
were in full retreat for Scotland, it
is stated by one of the leading noblemen
[16]
connected with the Pretender, that
“Mr. Morgan, an English gentleman, came up to Mr. Vaughan,
who was riding with the Life Guards, and after saluting him,
said, ‘D— me, Vaughan, they are going to
Scotland!’  Mr. Vaughan replied, ‘wherever they
go, I am determined, now I have joined them, to go along with
them.’  Upon which Mr. Morgan said, with an oath,
‘I had rather be
hanged
than go to Scotland to

starve
.’  Mr. Morgan
was hanged
in 1746;
and Mr. Vaughan
is an officer in Spain
.”

David Morgan, or, as he is occasionally designated, David
Thomas Morgan, was one of the boldest spirits associated with
this momentous struggle.  He was among the first of the
English, or Welsh, Jacobites to join the forces of Charles Edward
on his advance into England, and remained by his side until the
forward movement had been finally abandoned, and all hope of a
successful issue to the enterprize had been lost.

As was the case with many of the unfortunate participators in
the Rebellion, it was the fortune of David Morgan to be
misrepresented by the partisans of the reigning dynasty, and to
have his memory assailed by the most injurious aspersions, and
discreditable calumnies.  Long after the turbulent times in
which these brave and hapless men lived, it would have been
unsafe to suggest any palliation of their offence, to express any
sorrow for their melancholy fate, or to seek to defend their
memories from unmerited ignomy, and unjustifiable slander.
And, yet many of those whose memories have been clouded, and
whose names have been involved in partial oblivion, were men of
the highest honour, the most refined intelligence, and chivalrous
self-devotion.  In supporting the cause of the prince, whom
they regarded as the only lawful heir to the throne of their
country, the highest order of personal bravery, romantic heroism,
and complete disregard of all selfish considerations were evoked,
and
p. 17
called
into existence.  With a lofty disdain of the dangers which
they incurred, they braved the fearful penalties which the
barbarous laws relating to High Treason then awarded to its
luckless victims, and were content to sacrifice their positions
(distinguished and influential as many of them were), their
homes, and fortunes, and even life itself, for the cherished idea
to which they clung, and were devoted.  For themselves
individually, few of them could have anticipated much personal
advantage, even from a successful issue to their struggle; while
all that men cherished and held dear were fearfully
imperilled.  Yet these were the men whom a merciless but
dominant faction doomed to deaths invested with every horror that
cruelty and a brutal law could devise, and pursued with malignant
and unrelenting ferocity, even after they had expiated with their
lives the offences into which their mistaken but noble devotion
had led them.

Among the adherents of the young Pretender there were few who
evinced more devoted attachment to his cause, albeit a desperate
one, than David Morgan.  He appears to have received prompt
information of the movements of Charles Edward, and to have been
aware, at an early period, of the projected advance into
England.  The army of the Pretender commenced its
adventurous march from Carlisle, where the onward movement was
finally decided upon, on the 20th of November, 1745; and arrived
at Preston, in Lancashire, on the 27th,
[17a]
where the two divisions into which
their forces had been divided were again united, and rested for
the day.

Here it was that David Morgan joined them, with a friend,
whose name is unknown to me, but who, together with his servant,
had accompanied him from Monmouthshire.
[17b]
At the distance of a mile, or
so, from the town, the two gentlemen dismounted, and leaving
their horses in charge of the servant, walked to Preston, in
order to elude observation, and to avoid creating any suspicion
of their intention to join the rebels.

p. 18
The
circumstance of its appearing in evidence that he had left
Monmouthshire with his friend probably caused it to be inferred
that he resided in that county.  Such, however, was not the
case.  His residence was in Glamorganshire, though close to
the borders of the adjoining county of Monmouth.  It is
somewhat singular that the house of his father’s nativity,
if not of his also, as well as that in which he resided, though
nearly 20 miles apart, were situated in nearly the same relative
position with reference to the counties of Monmouth and
Glamorgan; and were, in each case, not far removed from the
Rhymney river, which divides those shires.

He appears to have spent much of his time in London, and to
have possessed a residence there; but, when staying in
Glamorganshire, he resided at Penygraig Taf, which, at that
period, must have been a singularly secluded and solitary
place.  It is situated in the hamlet of Forest, in the
parish of Merthyr-Tydfil, and occupies an elevated and
picturesque position on the summit of the hill that divides the
Taff from the Bargoed Taff valley, and is now a farm-house,
retaining nothing in its character to distinguish it from the
ordinary dwelling of a Welsh farmer.  At that period, the
population must have been very limited, and widely scattered; so
that few scenes could be found of greater seclusion, or more
conducive to quiet and calm contentment.

The river Taff, that flowed far below in the depths of the
valley, was then unpolluted by the dross and impure refuse of the
mines and manufactures of Merthyr-Tydfil, and, except when
agitated into wrathful turbulence by storms, and the rapid influx
of mountain torrents, rippled by in pure and calm serenity.
The small forge, at which iron had been manufactured as early as
the reign of Henry VIII., if not previously, at the place now
called Pontygwaith, or the bridge of the work, and immediately
below Penygraig, on the opposite side of the river, had long
ceased to resound in the valley, and Merthyr-Tydfil was then a
quiet village, containing perhaps at most a score of houses, or
so.  And now, when little more than a century
p. 19
has passed
away, how wonderfully have all things changed, and the stillness
of this remote locality been invaded.  Midway up the side of
the valley, not more than a mile from Penygraig House, now stands
the Quaker’s-Yard Station of the West Midland Railway, and
the two noble viaducts that carry the Taff Vale and the West
Midland Railways across the Taff river; while at an equally short
distance, stands another viaduct of elegant proportions that
spans the tributary valley of Bargoed Taff.

In this quiet spot David Morgan was roused from what may
possibly have been peaceful dreams of happiness, and calm
domesticity, to participate in the anxieties and perils of the
Rebellion.  On receiving the first intimation of the
Pretender’s arrival in Scotland, he departed from
Penygraig, to return there no more; and there is a tradition
still extant in that neighbourhood that, in starting on his fatal
journey, he stopped at Efail Llancaiach, which still exists as a
smithy, to have his horse shod, and is stated so have said to the
smith, in Welsh, “You are against me now, but when I return
you will be all with me.”  He then appears to have
proceeded to join the friend of whom previous mention has been
made, and to have journeyed with him on horseback through North
Wales into Cheshire, where he paid a visit to an acquaintance
residing at Etherton Hall.  From thence he rode to Preston,
in Lancashire, as already stated, to join the army of the
Pretender.

It is quite manifest that he must have been very actively and
influentially engaged in the movement prior to this, and well
known by reputation, if not by actual correspondence, to Prince
Charles Edward, as he was immediately received into his
confidence, and held so prominent a position in his counsels as
to cause him to be designated the “Pretender’s
Counsellor.”
[19]

He accompanied the army in its onward march to Manchester,
where it arrived on the 29th.  Though he had joined them
only two days previously, he was shown
p. 20
on his trial to have been one of the
most prominent actors in the proceedings that took place in that
town.  The Pretender was received at Manchester with
demonstrations of high satisfaction, and a large number of the
inhabitants enrolled themselves among his supporters, under the
designation of “the Manchester Regiment,” the command
of which was offered, in the first place, to David Morgan.
He, however, declined the position, and the unfortunate Colonel
Towneley,
[20a]
who, Morgan said, “was much
fitter than he was for such an office,” a Roman Catholic
gentleman of ancient family, high reputation, and more than
ordinary attainments, consented to assume the command.  But,
though declining to undertake any special command, he marched
with the army as a gentleman volunteer, was particularly active
and prominent, and appears to have been invested with
considerable authority.  He obtained an order from Secretary
Murray
[20b]
to search for arms, and for their
surrender on pain of military execution; and it was proved by one
of the constables of Manchester that he had obtained possession
of arms, which he had delivered at the lodgings of “Squire
Morgan.”  He wore a white cockade in his hat, and a
sword by his side.  It was likewise shown that he paid the
expenses, when the officers and he dined together;
p. 21
and as one of
the witnesses stated at his trial, “gave all the directions
about everything,” and rode at the side of the Pretender,
mounted on a bay horse.  It was further given in evidence
against him, that, “being at dinner with several rebel
officers at Derby, he asked Lord Elcho what number of men they
had? to which his lordship answered, about 4 or 5000, and 17
pieces of cannon.  That he then asked, what religion the
young Pretender was of? and Lord Elcho replied, shaking his head,
that he believed his religion was to seek.  That the
prisoner advised to beat up for volunteers, and said that it
would be an easy matter to march to London; for that there were
not above 3000 soldiers between London and that city, and those
mostly dragoons, except a few undisciplined troops lately raised
by Lords Gower and Cholmondely, who could make but little
opposition.”
[21]

They departed from Manchester on the 1st of December, and,
marching through Congleton, Leek, and Ashbourn, they entered on
the 4th December into the town of Derby, which was only one
hundred and twenty-seven miles distant from the metropolis.

The news of the Pretender having arrived at that town soon
reached London, and struck terror into the hearts of those who
were unfavourable to the Stuarts’ cause; and the King was
so seriously alarmed, that he ordered his yacht to be loaded with
his valuables, and to remain at the Tower Quay, prepared to start
at the shortest intimation.  At this time, precarious as the
Prince’s position unquestionably was, a bold dash in the
direction of London would probably have rendered him the
possessor of the throne of England.  Weaker counsels,
however, prevailed; the whole of the principal leaders
imperatively urged a retreat into Scotland, and the Prince was
compelled to succumb to their views, though wholly opposed to his
own convictions.  This decision sealed the fate of Charles,
and destroyed the glowing hopes that had hitherto buoyed him up;
but none of his adherents, as
p. 22
has been already stated, were more
clearly impressed with the conviction of the suicidal impolicy of
a retrograde movement than David Morgan.  Bold, decisive,
and rapid action could alone have saved them; and an onward march
would have encouraged the wavering, and strengthened the
determination of the doubtful; while many of their adherents, as
in the case of the Welsh gentry, were at that moment on their way
to join them.  But regardless of the prayers and entreaties
of the Prince, the Highland commanders held firmly to their
determination to return to Scotland; and on Friday,
[22]
the 6th of December, commenced the
melancholy retreat, that was the forerunner of so much subsequent
disaster, bloodshed, and ruthless cruelty.  Seeing the utter
hopelessness of their position, if left to the tender mercies of
the government, many of the English Jacobites determined to share
the fortunes of the retreating army, while others withdrew
themselves at various parts of the route, and made an effort to
save themselves by flight.  Among those who declined to
proceed into Scotland, as already mentioned, was David Morgan,
who parted from his friends at Ashbourn, near Leek, in
Staffordshire, on Saturday, the 7th of December; and, accompanied
by a guide, proceeded in the direction of Stone, near which place
he was apprehended on suspicion of having belonged to the
Pretender’s army, and placed in confinement.

Though apprehended early in the month of December, 1745, and
brought to trial among the first batch of the unfortunate
Jacobites, David Morgan suffered imprisonment until the close of
July, 1746.  Immediately preceding the trial, he was
imprisoned in Newgate, to which prison it is probable that he was
removed shortly after his apprehension.

The special commission was opened on the 23rd of June, when
eight of the Judges went in procession from Sergeants’ Inn,
to the Town Hall of St. Margaret’s Hill, and Lord Chief
Justice Lee delivered a charge to the
p. 23
grand jury.  The trials did not,
however, commence before the 15th of July, 1746, when seventeen
prisoners, including David Morgan, were placed at the bar, though
his trial did not, after all, take place until the 18th.

It is stated that “the time, place, or circumstances
were not varied in any of the indictments, except Counsellor
Morgan’s, who was indicted for having been in arms in Derby
on the 5th of December, and adhering to the King’s
enemies.”
[23a]

David Morgan had been too bold and prominent an actor in the
Rebellion to render it in any degree difficult for the government
to procure decisive evidence of his complicity; and, though he
made a lengthened and ingenious defence, the united testimony of
several credible witnesses insured his conviction.

After the breaking up of the court, all those that were found
guilty received notice that sentence of death would be passed
upon them on Tuesday, the 22nd of July, and were required to be
prepared on that day with any plea they might have to urge in
arrest of judgment.  Many objections were accordingly raised
on behalf of the prisoners, but were over-ruled by the court; and
Lord Chief Justice Lee then proceeded to pass sentence on the
whole of the prisoners, seventeen in number, the last of whom was
David Morgan, in a lengthy address, and concluded by sentencing
them, in the barbarous terms prescribed by the law of high
treason, “to be drawn to the place of execution, and when
they are come there, they must be severally hanged by the neck,
but not till they be dead, for they must be cut down alive; then
their bowels must be taken out, and burnt before their faces;
then their heads must be severed from their bodies, and their
bodies severally divided into four quarters, and these must be at
the King’s disposal.”
[23b]

At two o’clock, on the 29th of the same month, an order
arrived at the gaol for the execution, on the next day, of
Francis Towneley, George Fletcher, Thomas
p. 24
Chadwick,
James Dawson, Thomas Deacon, John Berwick, Andrew Syddal, and
David Morgan; and when it was intimated to them that they were to
die on the following morning; “they seemed not at all
shocked, but rather cheerful, only saying ‘God’s will
be done.’  They went to rest at the usual hour, and
slept soundly; but first took leave of their friends.”
[24a]
Among those who carne to take a
sad farewell of one of the unhappy men, was Mrs. Morgan.
During the whole period of her husband’s imprisonment she
had attended on him with remarkable devotion, and, to use the
words of a contemporary writer, by no means favourable to the
unfortunate Jacobites, “had behaved with all the love and
tenderness becoming an affectionate wife.”
[24b]

At six o’clock on the following morning they were
aroused from sleep, and unfastened from the floor, to which,
since their condemnation, they had been chained.  On
descending to the court-yard of their prison, Morgan ordered
coffee to be prepared for their breakfast, and bade them
“take care to make it very good and strong; for he had
never drunk any since he had been in that prison fit to come near
a gentleman.”
[24c]

With death in its most terrible form before them, never did
men manifest more undaunted courage and manly fortitude, nor more
calmly await the doom which they knew to be inevitable.
Actors and sufferers in the same cause, and participators in the
same sad fate, they sympathised with, and aided, comforted, and
consoled each other like a band of brothers.  Much has been
said of the lofty indifference to his doom that was exhibited at
his execution by the brave Lord Balmerino, which was of so
remarkable a character that a fear was expressed by himself that
his coolness might possibly be supposed to proceed from
insensibility to the great change that awaited him; from which,
however, the noble fortitude of the old Jacobite lord was very
far removed.  And, while clinging warmly to life, and to the
loved ones from
p.
25
whom they were about to be separated for ever, David
Morgan and his heroic companions had, in like manner, tutored
their hearts to manly resignation, and were determined so to die
as to reflect no dishonour on the cause which they had
espoused.  In their conduct and demeanour in the hour of
their great trial and suffering, they displayed neither levity,
nor stoical indifference to the awful fate that awaited them; but
comported themselves with the calmness and resignation of brave
Christian gentlemen.  After breakfast their irons were
struck off, Colonel Towneley being the first to have them
removed, and Mr. Morgan the second.  They were then
pinioned, and, while the sledges were being placed in readiness,
they were removed for a short time into a back room.  After
this they were placed in three sledges, each of which was drawn
by three horses; and about ten o’clock were removed from
the gaol, and taken to Kennington Common, guarded by a troop of
dragoons, and some companies of the Foot-Guards.  There the
gallows had been erected, and beside it were placed a pile of
faggots and a block.  On their arrival, the doomed men were
removed from the sledges to a cart that was placed under the
beam, for the purpose of receiving, and turning them off.
The faggots were then set on fire, and the guards formed in a
circle around the place of execution.

There being no minister of religion in attendance on either of
the condemned men, “Mr. Morgan, with his spectacles on,
read prayers, and other pious meditations to them,”
[25]
out of some devotional work, to which
they all paid marked attention, and joined devoutly and fervently
in the prayers that were offered up.  They continued at
their devotions for upwards of half-an-hour, after which they
arose from their knees, and each taking some papers out of the
book that he held in his hand, threw them, together with the
book, among the spectators.  Those papers appear to have
contained ardent professions of attachment to the cause for which
they died, and declarations
p. 26
that they remained faithful to their
principles, even to death.  They likewise handed statements,
of a similar purport, to the sheriffs, and then flung their hats,
which were laced with gold, among the crowd.  The
executioner immediately placed the caps on their heads, drew them
over their faces, and, the ropes having been adjusted round their
necks, they were at once turned off.  After they had been
suspended for about three minutes, their shoes, white stockings,
and breeches were pulled off by the soldiers, while the
executioner himself removed the other portions of the clothing,
immediately after which the body of Colonel Towneley was cut
down, and placed on the block.  Some appearances of life
having however, been observed, the executioner struck the body,
and cut the throat with a knife.  He then proceeded to
remove the bowels and heart, which he threw into the fire.
The head was afterwards severed from the body with a cleaver, and
both were placed in a coffin that stood ready to receive
them.  The body of poor David Morgan was the next to undergo
the same disgusting and barbarous mutilation, which was repeated
in succession on all the other victims, terminating with the
unhappy Dawson, after which the executioner shouted aloud,
“God save King George,” to which the multitude
responded with a yell.

The name of James Dawson is connected with a melancholy
incident which the poet Shenstone
[26]
made the subject of
the pathetic ballad of “Jemmy Dawson.”  He
belonged to a family of high respectability in Lancashire, and
had been educated at St. John’s College, Cambridge.
Having formed an ardent attachment for a young lady of handsome
fortune, they were engaged to be married just at the time of the
outbreak of the Rebellion.  All the influence of his
friends, and every effort that the most devoted affection could
suggest having failed to secure his pardon, no entreaties or
remonstrances could dissuade the faithful girl, to whom he was
affianced, from being
p. 27
present at the execution of the man
whom she loved with the deepest tenderness.  Through all the
horrors that characterised the melancholy scene, and while
witnessing the cruel and barbarous fate of her lover, she
exhibited no violent demonstration of sorrow; but when all had
been concluded, and the heart which had beaten so warmly for her
had been thrown into the flames, the terrible excitement, which
had hitherto sustained her wholly gave way, and,
exclaiming—“my dear, I follow thee!—I follow
thee!—sweet Jesus, receive both our souls together!”
she fell back in the carriage, and expired, as the last word
trembled on her lips.
[27a]

Though in passing to their trials the mob had hooted and
insulted them, it was observable at their execution that the
assembled multitude exhibited considerable sympathy, and appeared
to commiserate the fate of those gallant and hapless
gentlemen.

When the horrible proceedings had been entirely concluded, the
bodies of the sufferers were removed to the prison from whence
they had been brought, “to await his Majesty’s
pleasure;” and three days afterwards the heads of Towneley
and Fletcher were fixed on Temple Bar, while those of Deacon,
Berwick, Chadwick, and Syddal were preserved in spirits, and
conveyed to Manchester and Carlisle, to be exposed on conspicuous
places in those towns.  I have failed to ascertain how the
heads of Blood, Dawson, and Morgan were disposed of; but it is
probable that they were allowed to remain with the bodies.
Towneley’s body is said to have been buried at St. Pancras,
while the bodies of his companions were interred in the
burying-ground attached to the Foundling Hospital.
[27b]

Shortly after the execution, the statements which they had
delivered to the sheriffs were published;
[27c]
and that written by David Morgan is
here introduced.

p.
28
A true
COPY
of the Paper
delivered by David Morgan, Esq., to the Sheriff of Surry, at the
Place of Execution, on Wednesday, July 30th, 1746.

It having been always deemed incumbent on every Person in my

Situation
, to say something of himself, and
the
Cause
he
suffers
for, I could not decline it, however
disagreeable to my
Persecutors
, when I once held it my
Duty.

The
CAUSE
I embarked in was that
of my Liege Sovereign
King James the
Third
, from an Opinion I long since had of his
just
Right
: an Opinion founded on the
Constitution
, and
strongly recognized and established by an
ACT OF PARLIAMENT NOW IN ITS FULL VIGOUR
,
which neither the People
collectively
nor

representively
have any Power or Authority to

subvert
or
alter
.  [See the Statute of

Charles II
.]  Nor can that
Law
be repealed but
by a
free Parliament
summoned to meet
by a
lawful King
: Not by a Convention
commanded by
a

foreign Prince and Usurper
, and
intimidated and directed by
him
at the Head of a

foreign Army
.

To this
Convention
we owe the
Revolution
; to the

Revolution
we owe the
Accession
of the House of

Hanover
; and to this
Accession
all our present
Ills, and the melancholy and certain Prospect of the intire
Subversion of all that is dear and valuable to

Britons
.

My Opinion of the King’s Title
to the
imperial
Crown of these Realms
, thus uncontrovertible, received
additional Strength and Satisfaction from his
Character and
Qualifications
, confirmed to me by Persons of the strictest
Honour and Credit, and demonstrated to me, that
his
Establishment
on the
Throne
of his
Ancestors
,
would be an
Incident
, as productive of Happiness to the

Subject
, as of Justice to the
Sovereign
, since his

Majesty’s
confessed superior

Understanding
is absolutely necessary to extricate our

Country
out of that most desperate
State
she has
been declining to since the
Revolution
, and has

precipitately
fallen into since the
Accession
.

On this Declension and Ruin of our
Country
have the

Favourers
and
Friends
of both
Revolution
and

Accession
built
vast
and
despicable
Fortunes
; which possibly they may entail (with the conditions
of
Slavery
annexed) on their
betrayed
and

abandoned Issue
; it being much more clear that

Slavery
will descend
from Generation to Generation
,
than such Fortunes
so acquired
.

Have we not seen
Parliaments
, in a
long
Succession
, raise
Supplies
sufficient to surfeit

Avarice
?  Do we not see
that Avarice
heaping
up
Millions
for the Nurture and Support of
Foreign
Dominions
, on the Ruins of that
Country
that grants
them?  Nor can this move the least Compassion, or even
common
p.
29
Regard for her Welfare and Interest, from that

ungrateful Avarice
.

British Councils
, since the
Usurper’s

Accession
, have had
foreign Interest
their constant
Object; and the Power and Finances of the
imperial Crown of
Great Britain
have been betrayed, prostituted and squandered,
for the Convenience and Support of the
meanest Electorate in
Germany
; and the
Elector’s
Conduct has been more
destructive and detrimental to our Country, than all the

Finesse
,
Treachery and Force
, that the

French
, or any other
Adversary’s Council’s
and Power
could have attempted or effected.

Land-Armies
only can sustain and cover Dominions on the

Continent
; these are raised in the Country

protected
, and maintained by the Country

protecting
.  Here
Great-Britain
has all the
Burden, and
Hanover
all the advantage: Whereas
Navies
are the
British Bulwarks
,
which have, by the
Elector
, been neglected, misapplied, or
employed to her Disadvantage, and can alone guard and protect her

Dominions and Commerce
.

If the present
Convention
had any regard to
Self-Preservation, or that of their Constituents, they would

this Session
have made new
Laws
for the further
Security of
Privilege
: The
Pannick
diffused
universally over the
Electoral Family
would have prepared
an easy Assent to any Law in the Subject’s Favour: But,
even here, these
Representatives
omitted this
second
Opportunity
of securing and improving the Happiness of their
Electors, and, instead thereof, have given
additional
Power
to the
Usurper
to suspend the
bulwark of Liberty
, and invert the Order and
Method of
Trials for Treason
:
Precedents
they will
have occasion one Day to
repent of
, since they very
probably may fall
Victims to them
.

The false Glosses and Fears of
Popery
, universally
propagated, have deluded
unthinking vulgar
minds, and
diverted all Attention to Reason; when it is clear, to any just
Reflection, that his
Majesty
can have
no
happiness
but what results from
his Britain
,
who, he must know from
melancholy experience
, will not be
tempted to part with the
Doctrines
and
Exercise
of
the
Religion established
in her.  His
Majesty

must know, that a
lawful King
must adhere to the

Constitution in Church and State
, and shew a most
inviolable Attachment to those
Laws
that were made for the
Security of
both
, whatever Indulgences and Concessions are
made by
Conventions
to an
Usurper
for the Breach of
all.  A
lawful King is a nursing
Father
, who would protect us, and demand no more

Supplies
than the immediate Services required, and those
from the Riches of the
Country
, the Excrescences of

Trade
and
Commerce
, without Prejudice to either;
p. 30
and such
would be deemed best that were just sufficient for the Purposes
they were raised, and for which only they would be
employed.  But an
Usurper is a Step-Father
, that
builds his own Hopes and Views on the Ruin and Destruction of his

usurped Dominions
, and has
Joy
from the
fleecing
and impoverishing
of those under his
Influence and
Power
.

Even his
Majesty’s Enemies
allow him
great
Understanding
, nor has any one of them imputed
Breach of
Honour
to him.  His Abilities and Sense of our Situation
would move
him
to interpose in favour of his

Subjects
; and are equal (if human abilities are so) to
extricate us out of the various
Perplexities and
Intricacies
we have been brought into by
Negotiations
,

for thirty Years
, for the Preservation of the Balance of
Power, to the
Disappointment
of every

Briton’s
Hope, and the
Ridicule
of all our

Enemies
.

If you once think, my Brethren, you must repent; if you
repent, you must make the
Constitution just Reparation
;
which can only be done by calling in your lawful
King James the Third
, who has
Justice

to attempt, and
Wisdom
to compleat, a thorough

Reformation
in the Constitution, and to fix in its
pristine happy
State
; and which, in spite of all Chicane
and Prejudice,
without a

RESTORATION
will never be done.

I am to declare my Happiness in having such a
Wife and
Daughter
, that forgive my involving them in my misfortunes,
and having an undeserved Share in them: I heartily thank them,
and wish them both temporal and eternal Happiness: and hope that
those who are Friends to my
King
will look upon them as
the Relict and Orphan of a
Fellow-Subject
that has

suffered
in the
Royal
Cause
.

I glory in the Honour I have had of seeing his
royal Highness Charles Prince Regent
, and of
being admitted into his Confidence; and I here declare it the
greatest Happiness I ever knew, and the highest Satisfaction; and
such as even my vainest Thoughts could never have suggested to
me: An Honour to every rational Creature that can judge of the
many requisite
Virtues
of a
PRINCE
centred in him truly, tho’
so often falsely assigned to the
worst
.  His
Character exceeds any Thing I could have imagined or conceived:
An Attempt to describe him would seem gross Flattery; and nothing
but a plain and naked Narrative of his Conduct to all Persons,
and in all Scenes he is engaged in, can properly shew him.
A
Prince
betrayed by the
Mercy
he shewed his
Enemies, in judging of the Dispositions of
Mankind
by the

Benignity
of his own.  His
Fortitude
was
disarmed by it, and
his ungrateful Enemies
think they have
reaped the Benefit of it; but let them not rejoice at
his
Misfortunes
,
p.
31
since his Failure of Success will, without the immediate
Interposition of
Providence
, be absolutely their

Ruin
.  What a Contrast is there between his Royal
Highness the
PRINCE
and the
Duke
of Cumberland
!  The first displays his
true
Courage
, in Acts of
Humanity
and
Mercy
; the
latter a
Cruelty
, in
Burning
,
Devastation
,
and
Destruction
of the
British
Subjects, their
Goods and Possessions; I would ask—Who is the true
HERO?

The Report of my having betrayed his
royal
Highness
, or his Friends, is scandalously false; my Appeal
to the Counsel for the Prosecution on my Trial, and my suffering
Death, must refute it to all honest Men: And I hereby declare I
had rather suffer any Death the Law can inflict.—I deem
Death infinitely preferable to a Life of Infamy.—But the
Death I suffer for my
King
, gives me
vast
Consolation and Honour
that I am thought worthy of
it.

To conclude, my
Brethren
and
Fellow-Subjects
, I
must make Profession of that Religion I was baptized, have
continued, and shall through the divine Permission die in, which
is that of the
Church
of England, and which I hope will
stand and prevail against the Malice, Devices and Assaults of her
Enemies, as well those of the
Church of
Rome, as those
equally dangerous, the Followers of
Luther
and

Calvin
, covered under and concealed in the specious
Bugbears of
Popery and arbitrary Power
.  This my
Faith I have fully set forth in a
Poem
of two Books,
intitled,
The Christian Test
,
or the Coalition of Faith
and Reason
; the first of which I have already published, and
the latter I have bequeathed to the care of my unfortunate but
very dutiful Daughter Mris.
Mary Morgan
, to be published
by her, since it has pleased
God
I
shall not live to see it.  To this
Poem
I refer,
which I hope will obviate all Cavil to the contrary.

I freely forgive all my Enemies from the
Usurper
to

Weir
and
Maddox
the infamous Witnesses in support
of his Prosecution of me: And I must also, and do from my Heart,
forgive my
Lord Chief Justice
, for his
stupid and
inveterate Zeal
, in painting
my Loyalty to my King

with all the Reproaches he had Genius enough to bestow on it,
when he passed Sentence on Seventeen at once, and which he did
without Precedent because it was without Concern.

I beg all I have offended that they will forgive me for

Jesus Christ’s
Sake, my only Mediator and Advocate,

To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit
,
be all
Adoration
,
Praise
,
Glory
,
Dominion and Power
for ever
.  Amen.

DAVID MORGAN.

July 30.

1746.

p. 32
The few
particulars of those unfortunate gentlemen that appeared in the

Scots
and in the
Gentleman’s Magazines
, for
the year 1746, were unquestionably derived in a great measure
from a pamphlet that was published, shortly after their
execution, entitled, “A Genuine Acc
t
. of the
behaviour, &c., of Francis Towneley,” &c.
This pamphlet was characterised by considerable political
virulence; and, like all the publications of that turbulent
period, sought to defame the unfortunate Jacobites, and to cover
their memories with odium.  To defend them from such attacks
and unjust aspersions would, at that period, have been highly
dangerous, and justice could not possibly have been done to their
memories; but now when more than a century has elapsed since
their deaths, and the asperities of party feeling which then
prevailed have wholly disappeared, and, by the majority of our
countrymen, are scarcely known to have ever existed, their
reputations should be relieved from the unjust calumnies that
have so long been suffered to attach to them; and the chivalric
bravery with which these, and scores of other unhappy Jacobites,
laid down their lives on the scaffold, cannot fail to awaken the
sympathy and admiration of every Englishman.  These brave
but ill-fated men, without one exception, faced death with such
undaunted firmness as to excite the wonder, sympathy, and respect
of the multitudes who attended their executions.  Though
differing in age, social position, education, and habits, in
their demeanour and proceedings on the scaffold, the most perfect
similarity was exhibited; for, as Sir Walter Scott says,
[32]

“They prayed for the exiled family,
expressed their devotion to the cause in which they died, and
particularly their admiration of the princely leader whom they
had followed till their attachment conducted them to this
dreadful fate.  It may be justly questioned whether the
lives of these men, supposing everyone of them to have been an
apostle of Jacobitism, could have done so much to prolong their
doctrines as the horror and loathing inspired by so many bloody
punishments.”

p. 33
In the
pamphlet
[33]
to which I have referred, the character
of David Morgan is described to have been singularly unamiable
and arbitrary.  That such was the
worst
that could be
said of him by one who wrote as the advocate and apologist of the
dominant party, and the partisan of the ruthless government that
doomed him and his ill-fated friends to death, and with whom it
was regarded as a political necessity to traduce their
characters, and hold them up to public odium, seems to me to
afford very conclusive evidence that no discreditable stain
rested on his name that even a hireling scribe could distort into
a calumny.

The account given of him in the “Genuine Account”
is here subjoined in its entirety:—

“Being naturally of a haughty turbulent
disposition, his neighbours, tenants, and domesticks, were
continually plagued with his ill-humours.  But to sum up his
character in a few words; he was a morose husband, a tyrannical
master, a litigious neighbour, an oppressive landlord, and a
false friend.  He had pride without the least condescension,
avarice without a spark of generosity, illnature without a grain
of benevolence.  But what his virtues and better qualities
were, (if he had any,) has not come to our knowledge.  If
they had, we should gladly have mentioned them; that the world
might not run away with an opinion, that Mr. Morgan was the only
man who ever lived half a century without doing one good action,
and that he died unlamented by friend, neighbour, or
domestick.”

It appears to me that those aspersions on the unhappy
man’s character and disposition are fully refuted by the
whole tenor of his conduct during his imprisonment, and at his
execution; coupled with the fact that none of the traditions
existing in Glamorganshire regarding him are such as in any
degree justify, or lend the slightest confirmation to, those
representations of his enemies.  The affection and untiring
devotion of his wife, who constantly attended him in his prison,
his profound religious convictions during his confinement, the
impressive and fervent manner in which he read and prayed to his
unhappy companions at the place of execution, and the love
p. 34
and respect
with which they evidently regarded him, furnish very convincing
testimony to the goodness of his disposition, and the rectitude
of his principles.  The references which he makes to his
wife and daughter in his last address also show that the
relations existing between them were of the most affectionate
nature, and do not admit of the remotest inference that any
harshness or unkindness had ever been exhibited towards them by
the hapless husband and father; who, had such been the case,
would naturally, in the last few hours left to him on earth, have
sought their forgiveness.  But, though he does actually
beseech them to forgive him, it is “for involving them in
my misfortunes, and having an undeserved share in them;”
and I entertain a decided conviction that his only crime, if
crime it were, was that of sacrificing his life and property in
the effort to establish the principles that had probably been
instilled into his mind from his earliest years, and in
endeavouring to place on the throne of his ancestors the Prince
whom he had been taught to regard as the only rightful and
legitimate King.

The materials that exist for a biographical sketch of David
Morgan are extremely few, and very scanty in their nature.
He appears to have belonged to a family of considerable
respectability in the county of Glamorgan, and to have descended
from a branch of the distinguished house of Tredegar, Sir Thomas
Morgan, Knt.,
[34]
of Penycoed Castle, in Monmouthshire,
whose son James married the grand-daughter and heiress of Morgan
Jenkin Bevan Meirick, of Coed-y-gorres.  The father of David
Morgan was Thomas, the second son of William Morgan, gent., who
was described, in 1678, as the heir of Coed-y-gorres; and who, in
the year 1680, when his kinsman,
p. 35
Thomas Morgan, Esq., of Lanrumney,
was sheriff of Glamorganshire, filled the office of
under-sheriff.  In the year 1682, when the sheriff was
Rowland Deere, Esq., of Wenvoe, the under-sheriff appears to have
been Thomas Morgan, of Coed-y-gorres, the younger brother.
And again, in the following year, (1683,) the sheriff being
Thomas Lewis, Esq., of Lanishen, the position of under-sheriff
was held for the second time by William Morgan, of
Coed-y-gorres.

The eldest son of this William Morgan was also named William,
and married Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Probert, Esq., of the
Argoed, in Penalt, whose wife was the daughter of Thomas Morgan,
Esq., of Machen, a cadet of the ancient house of Tredegar.
This gentleman left three sons, named William, Henry, and Thomas,
who, in the year 1722, appear respectively to have filled the
offices of sheriff, under-sheriff, and county clerk of
Glamorganshire.

At this time it is to be presumed that friendly relations
existed between the brothers.  Their father had died in
January, 1718; but his widow survived until the year 1726, when
disputes appear to have arisen between the children respecting
the payment of legacies, and the distribution of the
personalty.  William Morgan had vested his property in
trustees, of whom there were three, viz., Henry Probert, Esq., of
Pantglas, Michael Richards, and Robert Howell, gentlemen; but the
two first named gentlemen appear to have died before the
widow.  Legal proceedings were commenced at the court of
great sessions for the counties of Glamorgan, Brecon, and Radnor,
in April, 1731; and only terminated in 1736, by an appeal to the
House of Lords.  The cases of the appellant and respondents
are in my possession, and I find therein a brief reference to
David Morgan, (who appears to have had some money transactions
with the deceased uncle,) which I shall extract.  It occurs
in the respondent’s case:
[35]
—

“That £197 15s., due on four notes and
a bond from
p.
36
David Morgan to the said testator, and included as part
of the said £1453 18s. 10d., was, by an account stated
between the said David Morgan, and the said Elizabeth Morgan, and
the respondent William Morgan, struck off there being a balance
of £65 charged to be paid due to the said David Morgan,
over and above the money due on the said notes and
Bond.”

As before stated, the second son of William Morgan (described
in the annexed pedigree as heir of Coed-y-gorres in 1678,) was
Thomas, who married Dorothy, the daughter of David Mathew, Esq.,
of Llandaff, by his wife Joan, the daughter of Sir Edward
Stradling, Bart., of St. Donat’s.  The only issue of
this marriage, so far as I have been able to ascertain, was David
Morgan, the unfortunate subject of this paper; and who thus
appears to have been closely allied to the two distinguished
families of Mathew and Stradling, then among the most wealthy and
influential in Wales.

The Mathew family boasted of an illustrious descent, being
derived from Gwaethvoed, Prince of Cardigan; and one of their
direct ancestors being Sir David Mathew, of Llandaff, who was one
of the most distinguished men of his time, and was made grand
Standard-Bearer of England by Edward IV.

The Stradlings, again, traced their descent, in unbroken
succession, from Sir William le Esterling, (which name became
corrupted to Stradling,) one of the twelve Norman knights
associated with Robert Fitzhamon, the cousin of William II.
(Rufus), in the conquest of Glamorgan.  As his share of the
conquered district, Sir William le Esterling obtained the castle
and manor of St. Donat’s, with other extensive
possessions.  Sir Thomas Stradling, the last of the name,
continued to reside at St. Donat’s; but died, a childless
man, at Montpellier, in France, on the 27th of September, 1738;
and was buried at St. Donat’s on the 19th of March,
1739.

David Mathew, Esq., of Llandaff, the father of Dorothy Morgan,
was likewise the father of Brigadier-General Edward Mathews, and
the grand-father of the
p. 37
well known Admiral Mathews, who was
thus the first cousin of David Morgan.  Admiral Mathews
contested the county of Glamorgan with Sir Charles Kemys Tynte,
of Cefen Mabley, and was elected by a majority of 47.  The
election was held at Cardiff, and commenced on the 2nd of
January, 1744, the poll extending over
nine days
.

Though possessed of no proof that such was the case, I
strongly suspect that the father of David Morgan acquired
Penygraig by his marriage to Dorothy Mathews.  But I have
not been able to learn whether he ever resided there, nor where
his son was born, though the period of his birth must have been
1695, or 1696.  His father, being the second son, would
naturally have removed from Coed-y-gorres after his marriage; and
it is probable that Penygraig became his residence.  Where
David was educated does not appear; but it is clear that he
received a liberal education.

Having studied law, and passed through the prescribed
formalities, he was, in regular course, called to the bar.
But the author of the “Genuine Account,” whether
truly or not cannot be clearly known, states that “not
making a shining figure there, he retired into the country, and,
after his father’s death, lived chiefly on his
estate.”  He was, however, well known in the Courts,
and had frequently practised at Westminster, and elsewhere;
though there is reason to suspect that he never devoted himself
very assiduously to the law, and that his predilections, at one
period, lay more in a military direction.  In the speech
which he made at his trial, when referring to the evidence that
showed him to have been the confidential adviser of the
Pretender, and his being designated the “Pretender’s
Counsellor,” he remarked, “as to my capacity as one
bred to the law, I confess that I never pretended to much
knowledge that way, and therefore was a very improper person to
counsel the chief of the rebels, for my advice could be of little
value to him.”
[37]

From the same source, combined with the fact of his
p. 38
readiness to
join the army of the Pretender, I draw the inference of his
military tendencies; for, he further observes, that he had
“served the Crown of England in two campaigns with some
reputation.”
[38a]
But no
further information has been obtained with respect to his
movements and proceedings, while engaged with the army, beyond
the fact that he was frequently addressed as
“Captain” Morgan.

He likewise appears to have taken rather an active share in
the political discussions of the day, and to have been a
prominent member of the club of independent electors of
Westminster; for I learn that, after his execution, two pamphlets
where published on the assumed appearance of his ghost at the
club.  Nor did he confine himself to political questions,
for poetry and polemics were somewhat incongruously blended in
his studies.  Horace Walpole speaks of him as “Morgan,
a poetical lawyer;”
[38b]
and it will be
remembered that in the paper delivered to the sheriffs at the
execution, he states, “this my faith I have fully set forth
in a poem of two books, entitled, ‘
The
Christian Test or the Coalition of Faith and
Reason
,’ the first of which I have already
published, and the latter I have bequeathed to the care of my
unfortunate but dutiful daughter, Mistress Mary Morgan, to be
published by her, since it has pleased God I shall not live to
see it.”

In addition to his estate in Wales, he possessed some valuable
leasehold property in St. Leonard’s, Shoreditch, which,
most probably, was acquired by his marriage; for his wife, whose
maiden name I have not succeeded in ascertaining, was a London
lady.  It is not clear whether he left more than one child
living at his death; for though he refers to his daughter Mary
Morgan only, in the pedigree of Mathews, of Llandaff,
[38c]
his daughter and
p. 39
heiress is
designated “Jane,” which, most probably, was an
error, and the name should have been “Mary.”
This lady had died unmarried prior to the year 1798, (but how
long previously I am unable to determine,) and her estates in the
county of Glamorgan were, at that date, held in trust for John
William, son of John Chittingden, of Tooting, Surrey, who was
then only three years of age, as her heir-at-law, and co-heir
with William Morgan Thomas,
[39a]
of Lanedern, in
the county of Glamorgan, whose age was then twenty-two
years.  It thus appears probable that the property of Morgan
either escaped confiscation, or was restored to his daughter on
the passing of the act for the restoration of the forfeited
estates.

It has already been stated that Penygraig
[39b]
is now an ordinary Welsh farm-house;
and Coed-y-gorres
[39c]
has long been
reduced to the same condition; while their connection with David
Morgan, and the recollection of his tragical fate, are only
retained in a few shadowy traditions that are rapidly fading out
of remembrance.

Glanwern, Pontypool,

Dec., 1861.

p.
40
PEDIGREE OF DAVID MORGAN, ESQUIRE,
BARRISTER-AT-LAW.

[40]

FOOTNOTES.

[7]
The “Young Pretender,”
as he was generally designated.  He was the son of James
Frederick Edward Stuart, usually called the “Old
Pretender,” and grandson of James II.

[9]
Williams’s History of
Monmouthshire.

[10]
Cambrian Quarterly Magazine, vol.
i. pp. 212, 213.  1829.

[11]
This shows the early hours that
prevailed in those days.

[12]
Cambrian Quarterly Magazine, vol.
ii. 1830.

[14a]
Referring to the exclusion of
Welshmen from Welsh Bishoprics it is remarked in a pamphlet,
published in 1831, that “this system is said to have
originated in the resentment of King William against the Jacobite
principles of the native Welsh Clergy.”—
Prize
Essay on the Causes which have produced Dissent in Wales
, p.
26.

[14b]
Chambers’s History of the
Rebellion, vol. i. p. 233.

[15a]
Chambers’s History of the
Rebellion, vol. i. p. 309.

[15b]
Lord Mahon’s History of
England.

[15c]
Forbes’s Jacobite Memoirs,
p. 55.

[15d]
Lord Mahon’s History of
England.

[16]
Lord Elcho’s MS.
Account.

[17a]
Jacobite Memoirs.

[17b]
Howell’s State Trials,
vol. xviii. p. 371.

[19]
Howell’s State Trials, vol.
xviii.

[20a]
Few families have been greater
sufferers through their loyalty and faithful adherence to their
religion than the Towneleys.  Francis Towneley was the fifth
son of Richard Towneley, of Towneley, county of Lancaster, and
was born in 1709.  His eldest brother, Richard, participated
in the Rebellion of 1715, but though tried for the offence, he
had the good fortune to escape.  The third brother, John,
entered the French service; and became tutor to the young
Pretender.  John Towneley distinguished himself by
translating
Hudibras
into French, and exhibited therein a
remarkable knowledge of the language.  The grandson of
Richard, the eldest brother, and the twenty-ninth possessor of
Towneley from Spartingus, Dean of Whalley,
temp.
Alfred
the Great, was Charles Towneley, to whose refined taste we owe
the well known collection, the “Towneley Marbles,”
which was purchased by the nation, for the British Museum, for
the sum of £20,000.

[20b]
The despicable Murray, of
Broughton, who acted as the Pretender’s Secretary.

[21]
Howell’s State Trials, vol.
xviii.

[22]
The Pretenders and their
Adherents.

[23a]
Scots Magazine, 1746.

[23b]
Howell’s State Trials,
vol. xviii.

[24a]
Scots Magazine, 1760.

[24b]
Authentic Account, 1760,

[24c]
Howell’s State Trials,
vol. xviii.

[25]
Scots Magazine, 1760.

[26]
Works of William Shenstone, vol.
i. p. 179.

[27a]
Thomson’s Memoirs of the
Jacobites, vol. iii. p. 415.

[27b]
Chambers’s History of the
Rebellion, vol. ii. p. 233.

[27c]
Authentic copies of the papers
wrote by Arthur Lord Balmerino, and others, and delivered to the
sheriffs at the places of execution, 1746.

[32]
Tales of a Grandfather, vol. iii.
p. 324.

[33]
A Genuine Account, &c.

[34]
In the reign of Edward IV.,
Morgan Jenkin Phillip was possessor of Pencoed.  He married
Margaret, daughter of Thomas Scudamore, of Kentchurch, and
great-grand-daughter of Owen Glendower.  Leland says,
“Morgan the Knight of Low Wentlande, dwelling at Pencoite,
a fair manor place, a mile from Bist, alias Bishopston, and two
mile from Severn Sei.  He is of a younger brother’s
house.”

[35]
Particulars privately printed for
the House of Lords.

[37]
Howell’s State Trials, vol.
xviii.

[38a]
Howell’s State Trials,
vol. xviii.

[38b]
Letters of Horace Walpole, Earl
of Oxford, to Sir Horace Mann, vol. ii. p. 166.

[38c]
MSS. of Sir Isaac Heard,
privately printed by Sir Thomas Phillipps, Bart.

[39a]
Ann, the third daughter of
William Morgan, Esq., of Coed-y-gorres, (who died in 1762,)
married John Thomas, of Fyn Fynon, in the parish of Llanedern,
Glamorganshire, and had one son, William Morgan Thomas.  The
representatives of this gentleman appear to have subsequently
resided at a place called Llanarthan, in the parish of St.
Mellon’s, Monmouthshire; and some of them were very
recently living.

[39b]
I have been informed that after
Morgan’s death this place came into the possession of
Mathews, of Llandaff, and was sold by a member of that family to
an ancestor of the present Colonel William Mark Wood, who now
owns it.  And this seems very probable, as I find that
Penycoed, in Monmouthshire, now the seat of the Morgans, having
been purchased by Admiral Mathews, was sold, about the year 1800,
by his grandson, John Mathews, Esq., to Colonel Wood of
Piercefield; and Penygraig may have been disposed of at the same
time.

[39c]
Coed-y-gorres is now the
property of the son of the late Rev. Windsor Richards, Rector of
St. Andrew’s, and of St. Lythen’s, in the county of
Glamorgan; but how acquired I am not able to show.

[40]
For those unable to see the
diagram it is given in text below.—DP.

Treharne Thomas ap Blethyn, of Lanedern, Gent.==Mallt, d. and
h. of Morgan Jenkin Bevan Meirick, of Coed-y-gorres.  They
had issue Mallt, d. and h.

[1st Wife . . . ==Sir Thomas Morgan, of Pencoed, Knt.==. . .
Widow of . . . Powell.  The second marriage had issue James
Morgan.]

James Morgan==Mallt, d. and h.  The had issue Morgan
James, of Coed-y-gorres.

Morgan James, of Coed-y-gorres, Gent.==Maud, d. to Watkin
William David ap Gwylym Jenkin Herbert, of Gwern Ddu.  They
had issue William Morgan James.

William Morgan James, of Coed-y-gorres, Gent.==Catherine, d.
and coheiress to Lewis ap Rees ap Morgan Prees Yychan, of
Lancaiach Yssa.  They had issue William, O. S. P. and
Catherine, d. and h.

Catherine, d. and h.==John, great-grandson to Sir Thomas
Gamage, of Coyty, Knt.  They had issue Thomas Morgan.

Thomas Morgan, of Coed-y-gorres, Gent., baptised 1st Jan.
1609==Margaret, d. to Evan Thomas Bevan Meirick, of Eglwysilan,
Gent.

William Morgan, Gent., heir of Coed-y-gorres in the year
1678==M. Elizabeth, d. to Watkin Thomas, Gent.

Thomas Morgan, of Coed-y-gorres, Gent., baptised 1st Jan.
1609==Margaret, d. to Evan Thomas Bevan Meirick, of Eglwysilan,
Gent.  They had issue William Morgan, Gent.

William Morgan, Gent., heir of Coed-y-gorres in the year
1678==M. Elizabeth, d. to Watkin Thomas, Gent.  They had
issue William Morgan of Coed-y-gorres; Thomas Morgan, second son,
of Coed-y-gorres; and two other sons, and five daughters.

William Morgan of Coed-y-gorres==Elizabeth, d. to Henry
Probert, of the Argoed, in Penalt, Esq.

[David Mathew, of Llandaff, Esq., 1678==Joan, d. of Sir Edmund
Stradling, of St. Donat’s, Bart.  They had issue
Dorothy]

Thomas Morgan, second son, of Coed-y-gorres==Dorothy.
They had issue David Morgan, Barrister

David Morgan, Barrister, executed on Kennington Common,
1746==. . . d. of . . . of London.  They had issue Mary (?)
d. and h.  O. S. P.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID MORGAN, THE WELSH JACOBITE***

***** This file should be named 62163-h.htm or 62163-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/2/1/6/62163

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.