Wireless Telegraph Construction For Amateurs

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the
Project Gutenberg License
included with
this ebook or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org/license
. If you
are not located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Wireless Telegraph Construction For Amateurs

Author: Alfred Powell Morgan

Release Date: December 30, 2020 [EBook #64174]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK
WIRELESS TELEGRAPH CONSTRUCTION FOR AMATEURS
***

Produced by James Simmons.

This file was produced from page images at the Internet Archive.

Transcriber's Note

This book was transcribed from scans of the original found at the Internet Archive. Tables are represented as images.
The index of the original book has been removed, but the catalog of books from the publisher has been included.
There was no book cover image in the scans so I created one.

Frontispiece.

Plate I. Electrical Conventions.

WIRELESS TELEGRAPH

CONSTRUCTION FOR

AMATEURS

BY

ALFRED POWELL MORGAN

EDITOR MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL DEPARTMENT OF THE "BOYS' MAGAZINE"

AUTHOR OF "WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY AND TELEPHONY"

WITH 167 ILLUSTRATIONS

Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged

WITH A COMPLETE DESCRIPTION OF THE

NEW WIRELESS LAW

NEW YORK:

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

25 PARK PLACE

1914

Copyright, 1910, 1913, by

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

Stanhope Press

F. H. GILSON COMPANY

BOSTON. U.S.A.

PREFACE.

In this work, the author has endeavored to present a
book embracing practical information for those who may
wish to build for private or experimental use a set of
wireless instruments which are more than toys but yet not so
expensive as the commercial apparatus.

Many books have been published on the subject of
wireless telegraphy, but in them the interests of the novice
have been rather neglected and in order to build an outfit
he has been forced to rely upon a series of disconnected
articles published in the amateur periodicals.

It is the object of this book to show the construction of
simple, efficient instruments by means of clear drawings,
and to give enough elementary theory and practical hints
to enable the experimenter to build a size and type in
keeping with his needs and resources.

The tiresome "how to make" style has been avoided as
far as possible. History and all unimportant details are
omitted to give in their place a concise explanation of the
parts played by the different instruments and the
influence of developing their various factors.

A small lathe and a set of taps and dies are necessary to
produce apparatus having a good appearance, but a little
ingenuity displayed in adapting screws and parts of old
electrical instruments oftentimes at hand will make these
tools unnecessary.

Ordinary precaution and plenty of time should be used in
the work. It is obvious that if a large coil is to be made,
it is well to insure its successful completion by painstaking
care and the use of proper materials. Neither is it wise to
strain an instrument through becoming impatient and using
it before it is properly completed and adjusted.

Wherever possible instructions have been given regarding
the adjustment of the apparatus, but it is only by actual
practice that the operator will acquaint himself with the
most efficient manipulation.

Extracts from articles contributed by the Author to

Popular Electricity
have been used in the chapters on
Spark Gaps, Oscillation Detectors and Telephone
Receivers, through the courtesy of the editor, Mr. H. W. Young.

In conclusion, the writer wishes to express his thanks to
the United Wireless Telegraph Company for views of their
apparatus and to the other firms who have loaned
electrotypes and supplied information. To those who have
assisted in the preparation of the book, more especially to
Mr. Safford Adams, for numerous suggestions and criticisms,
the Author desires to express his full acknowledgments.

ALFRED POWELL MORGAN.

UPPER MONTCLAIR, N.J.

June
, 1910.

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

The success of the previous editions of this book has
made a new and third one necessary.

There have not been any startling changes or new
discoveries made in the field of wireless telegraphy since the
first edition was published, but the art has undergone a
number of small changes and improvements which have
increased the efficiency and selectivity of the apparatus.

Since then a federal law restricting and controlling
wireless telegraphy has been passed. Its effect has been
to place wireless telegraphy upon a more certain basis,
and to give a recognized standing to the amateur
experimenter.

This new law has been included in this edition in the
form of an appendix. The amateur will do well to read
it carefully. Compliance with its regulations will prove
beneficial rather than a hindrance.

A fully illustrated chapter explaining exactly how to
comply with the law and how to build the apparatus
required has been added. Complete descriptions of several
new types of detectors are also included.

All old matter has been thoroughly revised and several
illustrations replaced by ones more up-to-date and of
direct interest.

ALFRED P. MORGAN.

UPPER MONTCLAIR, N.J.

May
, 1913.

PREFACE.

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY.

The Transmission and Reception of Electric Waves.

CHAPTER II. THE APPARATUS.

CHAPTER III. AERIALS AND EARTH CONNECTIONS.

CHAPTER IV. INDUCTION COILS.

CHAPTER V. INTERRUPTERS.

CHAPTER VI. TRANSFORMERS.

Construction of a 2-K.W. Transformer.

CHAPTER VII. OSCILLATION CONDENSERS AND LEYDEN JARS.

CHAPTER VIII. SPARK GAPS OR OSCILLATORS.

CHAPTER IX. TRANSMITTING HELIXES.

CHAPTER X. KEYS.

CHAPTER XI. AERIAL SWITCHES AND ANCHOR GAPS.

CHAPTER XII. HOT WIRE AMMETER.

CHAPTER XIII. OSCILLATION DETECTORS.

"UNIVERSAL" DETECTOR.

ELECTROLYTIC DETECTORS.

TANTALUM DETECTOR.

CRYSTAL DETECTORS.

LEAD PEROXIDE DETECTOR.

THE MARCONI MAGNETIC DETECTOR.

CHAPTER XIV. TUNING COILS AND TRANSFORMERS.

CHAPTER XV. RECEIVING CONDENSERS.

CHAPTER XVI. TELEPHONE RECEIVERS AND HEADBANDS.

CHAPTER XVII. OPERATION.

ELECTRICAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS.

CHAPTER XVIII. THE AMATEUR AND THE WIRELESS LAW. WHAT IT IS; HOW TO COMPLY; HOW TO SECURE A LICENSE.

APPARATUS REQUIRED IN MANY INSTANCES IN ORDER TO COMPLY WITH THE WIRELESS LAW.

Receiving Apparatus.

Frontispiece.

Plate I. Electrical Conventions.

Fig 1. Hertz Oscillator and Resonator.

Fig. 2. Hydraulic Oscillator.

Fig. 3. "Hydraulic" Transmitter and Receptor.

Fig. 4. Simple Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and Receptor.

Fig. 5. Electric Waves and Lines of Strain.

Fig. 6. Resonance Tube.

Fig. 7. Lag and Lead.

Fig. 8. Tuned Hydraulic Transmitter and Receptor.

Fig. 9. Tuned Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and Receptor

Fig. 10. Long-distance Receiving Set.

Fig. 11. Murdock Receiving Set.

Fig. 12. Clapp-Eastham Receiving Set.

Fig. 13. Prague Receiving Set.

Fig. 14. Receiving Set.

Fig. 15. Receiving Set.

Fig. 16. Murdock Transmitting and Receiving Set.

Fig. 17. United Wireless Portable Outfit.

Plate II. Aerial Systems.

Fig. 18. Electrose Insulators.

Fig. 19. Guy Insulator.

Fig. 20. Insulating Tube.

Fig. 21. High-tension Cable and Insulator.

Fig. 22. Flat-top T Aerial.

Fig. 23. Ground Clamp.

Fig. 24. Switch for Lightning Protection.

Fig. 25. Diagram of an Induction Coil.

Fig. 26. Induction Coil Core.

Fig. 27. Theoretical and practical form of secondary.

Fig. 28. Layer Winding for Small Coils.

Fig. 29. Section Winder.

Fig. 30. Impregnator for Silk Covered Wire.

Fig. 31. Methods of Connecting the Secondary Sections.

Fig. 32. Coil Case.

Fig. 33. Simple Interrupter.

Fig. 34. Independent Interrupter.

Fig. 35. Details of Magnets.

Fig. 36. Details of Moving Parts.

Fig. 37. Details of Standard and Screws.

Fig. 38. Diagram of Connections for an Independent Interrupter.

Fig. 39. Construction of a Paper Condenser.

Fig. 40. Wenhelt and Simon Electrolytic Interrupters.

Fig. 41. Construction of Electrolytic Interrupters.

Fig. 42. Details of Electrolytic Interrupters.

Fig. 43. Electrolytic Interrupter.

Fig. 44. Assembly and Dimensions of Core.

Fig. 45. Fiber Head and Separator.

Fig. 46. Section Form.

Fig. 47. Methods of Connecting Sections.

Fig. 48. Assembly of Leg.

Fig. 49. Transformer with One Secondary removed.

Fig. 50. Wiring Diagram.

Fig. 51. Clapp-Eastham 1/4-K.W. Transformer.

Fig. 52. United Wireless Motor-Generator set for supplying Alternating Current to the Transformer.

Fig. 53. Simple Condenser.

Fig. 54. Leyden Jar.

Fig. 55. "Aerial Switch."

Fig. 56. Amco Oscillation Condenser.

Fig. 57. Clapp-Eastham Oscillation Condenser.

Fig. 58. Methods of Varying Capacity.

Fig. 59. Spark Gaps.

Fig. 60. Spark Gap.

Fig. 61. Closely Coupled Helix.

Plate III. Transmitting Circuits.

Fig. 62. Prague Transmitting Helix.

Fig. 63. Closely Coupled Tuning Circuit.

Fig. 64. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Helix and Contact Clip.

Fig. 65. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Circuit.

Fig. 66. United Wireless Helix, Spark Gap and Condenser.

Fig. 67. Morse Key fitted with Extension Lever.

Fig. 68. Wireless Key.

Fig. 69. "United Wireless Type Key."

Fig. 70. Connections for Aerial Switch.

Fig. 71. Aerial Switches.

Fig. 72. Detail of Contacts.

Fig. 73. Details of Switch Parts.

Fig. 74. Method of Fastening Knife.

Fig. 75. "T" Aerial Switch.

Fig. 76. "United" Wireless Lightning Switch.

Fig. 77. Shoemaker Tuning Coil and Aerial Switch.

Fig. 78. "United" Wireless Anchor Gaps.

Fig. 79. Anchor Gap.

Fig. 80. Simple Hot Wire Meter.

Fig. 81. Meter with Case Removed.

Fig. 82. Glass Compensating Strip.

Fig. 83. Details of "Hot Wire" Supports.

Fig. 84. Details of Movement.

Fig. 85. Complete Movement.

Fig. 86. Side View of Hot Wire and Movement.

Fig. 87. United Wireless Hot Wire Ammeter.

Fig. 88. Universal Detector.

Fig. 89. Details of Universal Detector.

Fig. 90. Parts of Universal Detector.

Fig. 91. Bare Point Electrolytic Detector.

Fig. 92. Effect of Exposing too much Wire.

Fig. 93. Electrolytic Detector Circuits.

Fig. 94. Electrolytic Detector.

Fig. 95. Forming "Glass" Point.

Fig. 96. Shoemaker Detector.

Fig. 97. Shoemaker Detector Circuits.

Fig. 98. Lamp Detector.

Fig. 99. Simple Electrolytic Detector.

Fig. 100. Electrolytic Detector.

Fig. 101. Details of Electrolytic Detector.

Fig. 102. Increasing the Sensitiveness of an Electrolytic Detector.

Fig. 103. Tantalum Detector.

Fig. 104. United Wireless Carborundum Detector (horizontal type).

Fig. 105. United Wireless Carborundum Detector (vertical type).

Fig. 106. Clapp-Eastham Ferron Detector.

Fig. 107. Silicon Crystal in Cup.

Fig. 108. Silicon Detector Circuits.

Fig. 109. Perikon Detector Elements.

Fig. 110. Perikon Detector.

Fig. 111. Peroxide of Lead Detector.

Fig. 112. Marconi Magnetic Detector.

Fig. 113. Details of Transformer.

Fig. 114. Method of Joining Ends of Band.

Fig. 115. Pulley.

Fig. 116. Pulley Bearings.

Fig. 117. Circuit of Magnetic Detector.

Fig. 118. Fleming Oscillation Valve.

Fig. 119. Flame Audion.

Fig. 120. Circuit of Flame Audion.

Fig. 121. Double-slide Tuning Coil.

Fig. 122. Sliders.

Fig. 123. Double-slide Tuning Coil Circuits.

Plate IV. Receiving Circuits. (Straightaway Aerial.)

Fig. 124. Murdock Double-slide Tuning Coil.

Fig. 125. United Wireless Receiving Set.

Fig. 126. United Wireless Portable Receiving Set.

Fig. 127. Oscillation Transformer.

Fig. 128. United Wireless Receiving Transformer.

Fig. 129. Details of Receiving Transformer.

Fig. 130. Slider for Loose Coupler.

Fig. 131. Loosely Coupled Tuning Circuits.

Fig. 132. Combination Loosely and Closely Coupled Tuner.

Fig. 133. Clapp-Eastham Loose Coupler.

Fig. 134. A Highly Efficient Form of Loose Coupler.

Fig. 135. Potentiometer.

Fig. 136. Amco Potentiometer.

Plate V. Receiving Circuits.

Fig. 137. Tuning Circuit with and without an Adjustable Condenser.

Fig. 138. Tubular Condenser.

Fig. 139. Variable Condenser.

Fig. 140. Details of Variable Condenser.

Fig. 141. Sliding Plate Variable Condenser.

Fig. 142. Types of Permanent Magnets.

Fig. 143. Grinding Tool.

Fig. 144. Parts of a Holtzer Cabot Receiver.

Fig. 145. Holtzer Cabot Head Set.

Fig. 146. Adjustable Head Band.

Fig. 147. Marconi Station at Siasconset, Mass.

Plate VI. DeForest and Marconi Systems.

Fig. 148. Experimental Amateur Station of W. Haddon, Brooklyn, N. Y.

Fig. 149. Complete Receiving Outfit Consisting of Receiving Transformer, Detector, Fixed Condenser, Loading Coil, Two Variable Condensers, Potentiometer, Battery, Switches, etc.

Fig. 150. Receiving Outfit Consisting of Receiving Transformer, Fixed Condenser and Detector.

Fig. 151. Amco Oscillation Helix.

Fig. 152. Details of Oscillation Helix Construction.

Fig. 153. Quenched Gap.

Fig. 154. Quenched Gap.

Fig. 155. Details of Disk and Ring.

Fig. 156. Explanatory Drawing of Quenched Gap.

Fig. 157. Amco Rotary Gap.

Fig. 158. Details of Revolving Parts of Rotary Gap.

Fig. 159. Details of Rotary Gap.

Fig. 160. Methods of Preventing "Kick Back."

Fig. 161. Variometer.

Fig. 162. Silicon Detector.

Fig. 163. Pyron Detector.

Fig. 164. Galena Detector.

Fig. 165. Audion.

Fig. 166. Audion Circuit.

Fig. 167. Rotary Variable Condenser.

CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY.

Being desirous of keeping this book as far as possible
within the limits prescribed by the title, it is not possible to
go deeply into the theory of the propagation of electric waves,
but at the same time it is not deemed advisable to plunge
suddenly into the construction of wireless apparatus
without giving some explanation of the underlying principles.

If the reader desires information upon this subject he is
referred to Fleming's "Electric Wave Telegraphy" or the
same author's "Elementary Manual of Radio-telegraphy
and Radio-telephony."

The explanations given in this chapter do not involve
any actual theory of the transmission and reception of
electric waves. They are merely intended to show the
train of actions which take place and may be observed in
a physical sense. With this purpose in view, several
references have been made to simple hydraulic apparatus and
an analogy drawn to render the explanation clearer.

The Transmission and Reception of Electric Waves.

Wireless telegraphy by means of electromagnetic waves
may be divided into four distinct operations, namely:

The generation of electrical oscillations.

The transformation of electrical oscillations into electrical waves.

The transformation of electrical waves into electrical oscillations.

The detection of the electrical oscillations.

The first two operations comprise those taking place at
the transmitter, while the last two, which are the converse
of the first, are in evidence only when receiving.

Fig 1. Hertz Oscillator and Resonator.

Fig. 1 illustrates the original Hertz oscillator and
resonator, which is the simplest form a wireless installation may
take.
T
represents the
transmitting apparatus
and
R
the receptor. At
the transmitting station a
telegraph key is placed in
series with a battery and
an induction coil. Two
large metal plates,
t
and
t'
,
are connected to the opposite sides of the spark gap, which in turn is connected to
the secondary of the induction coil. When the key is
pressed the electrical circuit is completed and the voltage
of the battery is raised sufficiently by the induction coil to
charge the metal plates
t
and
t'
.

The key serves to break the current into periods
corresponding to the dots and dashes of the telegraph code.
When the high voltage of the induction coil is impressed
upon the plates they become charged, and being of opposite
polarity, when at a maximum the energy rushes across the
gap and produces a disruptive spark. Each discharge,
although appearing like a single spark passing in one
direction, is in reality made up of a large number of rapid
oscillations or surgings. The first passage of current serves to
more than discharge the plates and they become charged
in the opposite direction. A reverse discharge then occurs
which also oversteps itself, and thus the oscillations go on,
but gradually become weaker and weaker until they die
completely or are damped out. The heated air of the
spark gap becomes a conductor during the passage of the
spark, and the oscillations are enabled to surge back and
forth at the rate of 15,000 to 1,000,000 per second, although
the actual discharge may take only a fraction of a second.

Fig. 2. Hydraulic Oscillator.

The generation of electrical oscillations may perhaps be
made more clear by reference to the hydraulic apparatus
illustrated in Fig. 2.
T
and
T'
are
communicating tubes divided by an elastic
membrane M. The tubes may be likened
to the metal plates
t
and
t'
or the arms of
the oscillator. The membrane may be
likened to the layer of air between the
knobs which separates the opposite arms
of the oscillator.
P
is a pump connected
to the two tubes
T
and
T'
, and the
broken lines in the apparatus represent water. The
pump corresponds to the induction coil in Fig. 1, and
the water to the secondary currents of the induction
coil. When the pump is set in operation, the water is drawn
from the tube
T
and injected into
T'
. The pump valves
prevent it from flowing back. When the level becomes
very high in
T'
, the great pressure distends the
membrane in the direction shown by the dotted line until
finally it bursts and the water is allowed to flow with a rush
into the tube T. But the inertia of the water causes it
to rise higher in the tube than its final position of
equilibrium, while in returning and endeavoring to seek its level
its inertia carries it below this position. Thus the water
oscillates back and forth until finally it comes to rest.

Similarly the difference of potential of the oscillator arms
is not immediately equalized upon the breaking down of
the air gap, and the apparatus becomes the seat of extremely
rapid electrical oscillations, as explained above.

All space is supposed to be filled with a highly
attenuated, invisible and weightless medium called ether.
When the electrical oscillations surge back and forth
through the arms of the oscillator, portions of the energy
are thrown off from the apparatus and travel in enlarging
circles like the ripples on a pond. These consist of lines
of dielectric stress or electrostatic flux which pass through
the ether and constitute electromagnetic waves.

The receptor or resonator
R
, Fig. 1, consists of a circle
of wire having in it a small spark gap capable of minute
adjustment. Two metal plates
r
and
r'
are sometimes
attached to the opposite sides of the spark gap. When
the key is pressed at the transmitting station and waves
are sent out through the ether, they strike the resonator
and set up therein electrical oscillations which pass across
the gap in the shape of sparks.

Fig. 3. "Hydraulic" Transmitter and Receptor.

To make the explanation clearer, let us consider Fig. 3
in which two floats or blocks of wood are represented as
resting on the surface of a tank or pool of water. One
float,
A
, is connected by a rope and pulley so that by
jerking the rope the float may be made to
oscillate
and cause
little ripples or waves to pass outwards in a gradually
enlarging circle. When the waves reach the float,
B
, they
cause it to rise and fall with each wave or to oscillate and
reproduce the movements of the float,
A
. Likewise the
oscillations set up by a wireless transmitter are sent out
into space to be caught and duplicated at the receiving
station. Of course this analogy to the propagation and
reception of electric waves is not the same as the true
electrical actions, but is merely a graphical, representation.

Fig. 4. Simple Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and Receptor.

The wireless telegraph outfit illustrated in Fig. 1 would
not serve for more than short distances of a few feet, and
so a somewhat similar but more efficient apparatus is
employed in practice. Fig. 4 shows such a system in its
simplest form. In this case the secondary or high
potential leads of the induction coil are connected, one to an
earth and the other to an aerial or antenna composed of
a number of bare copper wires insulated and suspended
from a mast.

All electrically charged bodies are surrounded by an
electrostatic field of force, the nature of which in theory
is a state of strain.

The action of an induction coil connected as in Fig. 4
is to charge the upper part of the aerial above the spark
gap, say with negative electricity and establish a field of
force in its vicinity varying in area from a few feet to
several miles. When the charge reaches a certain
potential it is sufficient to puncture the layer of air in the gap
and a spark takes place, setting up electrical oscillations.

Fig. 5. Electric Waves and Lines of Strain.

Previous to the rupture of the spark gap,
lines of electric
strain or force
stretch from the aerial to the earth on all
sides as in the center of Fig. 5. A line of force may be
defined as a curve drawn in the electric field so that the
direction of the curve is the same as that of the electric
intensity at that point.

The aerial and the earth act like the two metal plates
in Fig. 1 or like the opposite plates of a condenser. As
soon as the air gap is punctured it becomes conductive
and the aerial charge rushes down into the earth. With
the discharge, the strain in the electrostatic field is released
and the aerial charge rushes down into the earth, but in
so relaxing produces a new current and builds up a strain
around the antenna opposite in direction to the first. This
process repeats itself very rapidly and electrical oscillations
are thus set up in the antenna. Every oscillation changes
the direction of the magnetic flux or dielectric strain and
causes the imaginary lines which originally stretched from
the aerial to the earth to be displaced and the ends
terminating at the aerial to run down it and form semi-loops
or inverted "U's" standing with their ends on the earth
in a circular ripple around the aerial and moving away
from it with the speed of light. In Fig. 5 three
oscillations are supposed to have taken place. The shortest
distance between two adjacent points at which the electric
strain is at a maximum in the same direction and period
of time is the
wave length
emitted by the aerial. The
separate standing groups of dielectric strain moving away
from the antenna are electromagnetic waves. In the
figure, the adjacent groups are separated by half a wave
length. These waves are emitted at right angles to the
transmitting aerial, whence they pass through the ether to
the other station. When they reach the receiving aerial
they set up electrical oscillations therein which are
too weak
to be perceptible in the shape of sparks
as in the original
Hertz oscillator and resonator because of the great
distance separating the stations, so they are made to flow
through a
detector
, which in Fig. 4 is represented as being a
crystal of a mineral called silicon. When the high
frequency currents strike the silicon, they set up a weak
pulsating direct current. This action is due to a peculiar
rectifying property of the mineral. The direct current
flows through the telephone receiver and produces an
audible sound. If the aerial and ground were connected
directly to the terminals of the telephone receiver,
without the silicon, the oscillations would not pass because of
the impeding or choking action of the electro-magnets in
the telephone receivers.

Tuning.
—It is sometimes desirable that messages
should be made selective or secretive. It is obvious that if
there were several large stations in the same neighborhood
they could not all operate at the same time unless some
means of preventing the stations from receiving more than
one message at a time were possible. This is the object
in view of the so-called "tuning" of wireless telegraphy.
It also accomplishes a second purpose which is perhaps
considered more important than the first. The length of the
aerial may be too great or too short for the amount of
energy and the length of the waves which it emits or
receives. When this is the case, the oscillations are quickly
damped out and do not generate very powerful waves or
produce strong signals at the receiving station and thus by
properly adjusting the circuit all undesirable messages may
be cut out as well as the signaling range greatly increased.
Every electrical circuit has a definite period or electrical
length, determined by its inductance and capacity. A
circuit emits waves of only one length for given values of
inductance and capacity, and must also be of a certain
length before it will respond to waves sent out by another
transmitter. The careful adjustment of a circuit to emit
or receive a given wave constitutes
tuning
.

Fig. 6. Resonance Tube.

This may be made more clear by the comparison of an
electrical circuit with a column of air. Fig. 6 represents a
cross section of a glass tube,
T
, lying
in a horizontal position and
containing a cork,
C
, which can be slid to
various positions. By adjusting the
cork we are able to obtain various
depths of air in the tube from its
open end,
M
, to the cork,
C
.

When a vibrating tuning fork,
F
, is held opposite the
open mouth and the cork slid back and forth it is found
that the sound of the tuning fork is greatly increased in
volume at a certain position of the cork. If the cork is
then removed from this position the sound decreases in
intensity. When the cork is in such a position that the
sound of the fork is reenforced, we have secured resonance.
When in this condition and the prong of the vibrating
fork is moving toward the open mouth of the tube a
"condensed" pulse of air travels down the tube and back again,
having been reflected at the cork and reaching
M
just as
the prong of the fork begins its excursion away from the
open mouth of the tube. When the prong of the fork is
moving away from
M
a "rarefied" pulse of air moves from

M
to
C
and back again by the time the prong is ready to
begin its next vibration. When the tube is not in resonance,
the successive condensations and rarefactions passing up
and down the air column interfere with one another and
decrease instead of increase the sound of the tuning fork.

If we substitute the sound waves emitted by the tuning
fork for high frequency oscillations and the air column for
the electrical circuit we may readily see that by adjusting
its length, resonance can be produced. If the length of
the air column is measured it will be found that the
reenforcing of the sound of the fork reaches a maximum when
the depth of the air column is
one-fourth
of the sound wave
length given by the fork. Likewise resonance is produced
in wireless telegraphy when the length of the circuit is

approximately one-fourth
the length of the waves. Vice
versa, the wave emitted from an ordinary closed circuit
transmitter is
approximately four times
the length of the
aerial wire. For example, an aerial 25 meters long will
emit waves having a length in the neighborhood of 100
meters.

As stated above, tuning is accomplished and resonance or
syntony established by varying the inductance and capacity
of the circuit. The capacity of a circuit may be defined
as its relative ability to retain an electrical charge, while
inductance is the property of an electric circuit by virtue
of which lines of force are developed around it.

Capacity and inductance are opposite or reactive in their
effects upon a circuit. If the value of one is decreased the
influence of the other in increased. Fig. 7 and the
following explanation will serve to illustrate this.

Fig. 7. Lag and Lead.

Alternating currents do not always keep step with the
voltage impulses of a circuit. If there is inductance in the
circuit, the current will lag behind the voltage, and if there
is capacity, the impulses of the current will lead. Fig. 7
A

illustrates the lag produced by inductance and
B
the lead
produced by capacity. In
A
the impulses of the current,
represented by the full line, occur a little
later
than those of
the volts as represented by the dotted line. In
B
the effect
is just the opposite and the current leads. These reactive
effects of inductance and capacity are very pronounced
with the high frequency currents of wireless telegraphy, and,
as stated before, are the factors which determine the period
of the circuit.

Fig. 8. Tuned Hydraulic Transmitter and Receptor.

Tuning is represented graphically in Fig. 8. The two
floats
A
and
B
are not only resting on the surface of a pool of
water as in Fig. 3 but are also suspended from the springs
S

and
S'
. The springs will have, like a pendulum, a definite
time of rising and falling, or period of oscillation, depending
upon their length. If we strike the float
A
the spring will
cause the float to rise and fall at a definite rate and send
out a little wave or ripple with every oscillation. If the
springs
S
and
S'
are of the same length, the float
B
will be
caused to oscillate with every wave sent out by
A
, for, the
periods of the springs being equal,
B
will be permitted to
rise with a wave and fall again just in time to be raised
by the next oncoming ripple. On the other hand, if the
springs are of different lengths,
B
may only rise slightly and
in falling meet an oncoming wave which will cause it to rise
before it has reached its lowest point and so dampen or
weaken its oscillations that they either do not become very
strong or are entirely obliterated. Thus several floats
having different periods of oscillation might be sending out
ripples in the same pool, and the float
B
could be made to
respond to any of them by adjusting the length of the
spring.

We may also see in this illustration the part that tuning
plays in causing the apparatus to emit or receive more
powerful impulses. When the rope in the untuned
apparatus illustrated in Fig. 3 is jerked, the block
A
oscillates
only once or twice before a new jerk is required to keep it
in motion. In Fig. 8 it is quite the contrary, for when an
impulse has been given to the float
A
it will oscillate much
longer than the untuned float before it requires to be set
in motion again. Likewise the float
B
in Fig. 8 will
oscillate longer and more powerfully than the float
B
in Fig. 3,
when once it has been set in motion.

Fig. 9. Tuned Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and Receptor

Fig. 9 shows a diagram of a simple wireless telegraph
system employing an inductance and capacity for tuning
the circuits. When the induction coil is in operation it
charges a condenser. The condenser discharges through
the sending helix and across the spark gap. The sending
helix is merely a spiral coil of wire of large diameter, and
constitutes the greater part of the inductance in the
circuit. Two movable contacts,
A
and
B
, make connections
with the helix. The spark gap, condenser and lower portion
of the helix up to the movable contact
A
are known as the
closed circuit. By shifting
A
, more or less inductance may
be included in the closed circuit until resonance is secured.
The aerial, the inductance from the contact
B
down, the
condenser and the ground compose the open circuit. By
varying the contact
B
more or less inductance may be
included in the open circuit and its period altered until the
oscillatory currents of both circuits flow in the same period
of time. The closed and open portions of the transmitting
helix form an auto transformer, and the voltages of the open
circuit are raised above those of the closed circuit.

The tuned receptor shown in Fig. 9 is the simplest form
possible and is known as the single slide system. The
tuning coil or helix is much longer in proportion to its diameter
than the sending helix, and is made of finer wire, since it
does not carry such heavy currents. When the contact
is slid up or down on the tuning coil, the inductance of
the circuit is varied. Since the oscillating currents in the
receiving aerial have the same frequency as those in the
radiating aerial, the receptor must have the same relative
values of inductance and capacity. This condition is
obtained by varying the slider until the signals in the
telephone receivers are the loudest.

In practice more than one sliding contact is used, and these
together with adjustable condensers make the circuit more
complicated. These devices are necessary because
oscillations may be forced on a receptor by a near-by transmitter
unless other precautions than the "single slider" are taken.
Such circuits are illustrated in Plates IV and V. With
them it is possible to obtain a considerable degree of
selectivity and "tune out" an undesirable message.

CHAPTER II. THE APPARATUS.

It is generally the receiving apparatus which first attracts
the attention of the amateur operator, and so it will be
considered first here. An efficient receiving set consists of some
form of
Detector, Tuning Coil, Telephone Receivers
, and

Condenser
.

Other accessories such as adjustable condensers,
potentiometer, battery and testing buzzer improve the outfit
and make it more complete.

The choice of the type of instruments must be left entirely
to the person who is constructing them. His resources
will determine whether he is to use 1,000 ohm telephone
receivers built especially for wireless work or ordinary ones
having a resistance of only 75 ohms. It is therefore best
to read carefully the chapters devoted to the different
pieces of receiving apparatus and select the type of detector,
tuning coil, etc., which it is desirable to use before
commencing the construction of any.

For beginners, I would recommend an outfit consisting
of a silicon detector, a double slide tuning coil, a condenser
of fixed capacity and 75-ohm telephone receivers. Such an
outfit with a 50-foot aerial will receive messages about
150 miles. If 1,000 ohm telephone receivers are used,
messages may be read up to 400 miles. Much depends
upon the location of the station and the ability of the
operator.

A more elaborate and efficient set consists of an
electrolytic or "Perikon" detector, a transforming tuner, two
adjustable condensers, a potentiometer and a pair of
1,000 ohm telephone receivers. This outfit and a 75-foot aerial
could be made to receive 500 to 1,000 miles by a careful
operator.

Several cuts of wireless apparatus built for private
installation are shown both in this chapter and further
through the book, to give an idea of how the better
instruments of this type are constructed and finished.

Fig. 10. Long-distance Receiving Set.

Fig. 10 illustrates a selective receiving set built by the
Long Distance Wireless Company. The set is mounted on
a mahogany base and the instruments are finished in
polished hard rubber and lacquered brass. They comprise a
detector stand so arranged that any of the sensitive minerals
used in wireless work may be used. The tuning coil is of
the double slide type. The condenser is sealed up in a
square lacquered brass tube fitted with hard rubber ends
and binding posts. The arrangement and construction of
the outfit may be readily understood from the cut.

Fig. 11. Murdock Receiving Set.

Fig. 11 illustrates a receiving set manufactured by the
Wm. J. Murdock Company. The tuning coil is fitted with
hard rubber composition ends and is wound on a special
core which is not affected by temperature changes. The
detector is of the crystal type and is of rather unique
construction, since the small fixed
condenser is mounted in the base
of the detector itself.

The Clapp-Eastham set in Fig.
12 employs a receiving
transformer which makes great
selectivity possible. The detector is
mounted at the left-hand side
of the outfit. A very sensitive
mineral called "Ferron" is used
in the detector. The fixed
condenser is enclosed in a brass tube fitted with hard rubber
ends and is located on the front of the base, directly in
the center. A variable condenser of the rotary type is
placed at the right-hand corner.

Fig. 12. Clapp-Eastham Receiving Set.

The Prague Electric Company manufacture the
apparatus shown in Fig. 13. The cabinet is mahogany and is
fitted with a hard rubber cover. A fixed condenser and a
double slide tuning coil are mounted within the cabinet.
The sliders of the tuning coil project through two long slots
in the cabinet. A universal detector mounted on top of
the cabinet is so designed that any material may be
experimented with or tested.

Fig. 13. Prague Receiving Set.

Fig. 14 shows a receiving set built up from apparatus
described in this book. The cabinet is 12 x 16 inches and
4 inches deep. The wood should be 1/2 inch thick, and in
order to present a good appearance is preferably of
mahogany. As mahogany is sometimes very hard to procure
and expensive, some may find red birch an excellent
substitute. When stained with a mahogany stain it presents
a fine appearance.

Fig. 14. Receiving Set.

Varnishing and polishing are wasted time when applied
to the average amateur's instruments in view of the rough
handling and scratching which they receive. The best
plan is to stain the wood with an oil stain and give it a
wax finish. An oil stain contains no varnish but is merely
coloring matter and oil. A good coat should be applied
with a wide brush and the surplus stain immediately wiped
off by rubbing the whole surface with a piece of cheesecloth.
As soon as the stain is thoroughly dry the wood is waxed.

Cut up some beeswax into fine shreds and place it in a
jar. Pour some turpentine over the beeswax and let the
mixture stand for five or six hours, giving it an occasional
stir. Allow it to stand further if necessary until the wax
melts and then add enough turpentine to give the mixture
a consistency similar to that of thick cream. Apply the
preparation to the wood with a rag, and then rub with a
piece of clean cheesecloth until the finish is hard and
dry. Waxing produces a gloss which is not so bright as a
French polish but yet is more durable and not so easily
scratched or marred.

A double slide tuning coil made as described in Chapter
XIV is mounted on top of the cabinet in the rear. A
"universal" detector is mounted in the center, directly in
front of the tuning coil. A tubular condenser of fixed
capacity is placed on the left-hand side of the detector, and a
potentiometer on the opposite side. A double point switch
placed directly in front of the detector enables the
potentiometer to be brought into play when a battery is used.
Four binding posts are mounted on the front of the cabinet.
The ground and aerial are connected to the left-hand pair
and the telephone receivers to those on the right hand.
The wiring diagram is shown also in Fig. 14. By placing
the switch
A
on contact 1, the potentiometer is brought into
use. When on contact 2, the potentiometer is cut out.
The switch
B
must be opened when the detector is not in
use so as not to run down the battery.

Fig. 15. Receiving Set.

Fig. 15 shows a receiving set somewhat similar to that
shown in Fig. 14 but more elaborate and efficient. The
cabinet in this case measures 14 x 22 inches and is 6 inches
deep. A loosely coupled or transforming tuning coil is
used in place of the closely coupled double slide type. Two
variable condensers are mounted on either side of the
tuning coil. The detector and potentiometer occupy the
space directly in front of the tuning coil, while a fixed
condenser is placed at their right. The two switches for
breaking the battery circuit and disconnecting the potentiometer
are in front of the detector. The aerial, ground and
telephone receiver leads are connected to binding posts mounted
on the front of the cabinet.

The batteries, in both cases, are placed inside the cabinet.
The details and construction of all the separate instruments
will be found in the respective chapters as denoted by the
titles.

Transmitting Range.
—A simple transmitting outfit
capable of sending about two miles consists of the necessary
batteries, a one-inch spark induction coil, a small zinc spark
gap and a key. The connections of such a transmitting
outfit are shown in Fig. 4.

If the same coil is used with a transmitting helix and a
condenser, the range may be increased from 3 to 5 miles.

A 1 1/2-inch spark induction coil using a condenser and a
transmitting helix will send about 10 miles, and a 3-inch
coil under the same conditions about 20 miles. A 4 and a
6 inch coil will transmit about 30 and 40 miles respectively.

Fig. 16. Murdock Transmitting and Receiving Set.

The one quarter kilowatt transformer with a helix and
four two-quart leyden jars or an equivalent condenser will
transmit at least 50 miles with a suitable aerial. Used as a
one half kilowatt transformer with a helix and eight
two-quart leyden jars, it will send about 100 miles.

Of course, as in the case of the receiving outfits, these
distances are approximate and depend upon the location
of the station, the nature of the ground over which the
messages are transmitted, the kind of receptor used at the
receiving station and the efficiency of the operator himself.

Fig. 16 illustrates a complete Murdock transmitting and
receiving set. The transmitting outfit consists of a 15-watt
induction coil giving about a one-inch spark, a sending
helix, oscillation condenser, a key and a double pole double
throw switch for changing the antenna and ground from
the transmitting to the receiving instruments or vice versa.
The spark gap is mounted on top of the coil. The
receiving outfit is the same as that illustrated in Fig. 11.

A complete wireless station
—outside of the aerial consists
primarily of a source of electrical energy, a transformer or
induction coil for charging the oscillation condenser, an
oscillation condenser, a transmitting helix, a key for
breaking the primary current, a spark gap, an aerial switch, a
hot wire ammeter for tuning the transmitting circuits, a
detector, a receiving tuner, auxiliary tuning apparatus such
as fixed and variable condensers, a potentiometer and
battery, and a pair of telephone receivers with a headband.

Other apparatus such as switches, insulators, anchor
gaps, testing buzzers, reactance coils, grounding switches,
etc., have been described in various places throughout
the book and their use suggested whenever it is of any
advantage.

The choice of transmitting instruments, as with the
receiving apparatus, is left entirely with the experimenter
so that he may suit his ideas and means. Wherever possible
the range and power of the instruments have been given
and suggestions made as to the other apparatus which
should be used in connection with them so that the
completed outfit will bear some sense of proportion.

Fig. 17. United Wireless Portable Outfit.

Fig. 17 illustrates the portable wireless telegraph set
manufactured by the United Wireless Telegraph Company
for army service and exploring expeditions or isolated
camps. The aerial and the mast can be unloaded, erected,
and all parts be ready for operation in fifteen minutes.
The mast is made of interchangeable wooden sections.
The current for the transmitter is furnished by a portable
storage battery. The whole outfit is capable of furnishing
efficient service for distances of 25 to 30 miles.

CHAPTER III. AERIALS AND EARTH CONNECTIONS.

The aerial or antenna ordinarily consists of a number
of wires elevated in the air to emit or intercept the
Hertzian waves. In fitting up a wireless station the location
and erection of an aerial are of prime importance, and the
successful reception and transmission of wireless messages
will depend largely upon its condition.

A few years ago the wireless antenna consisted of a metal
plate high in the air and having a wire suspended from it,
but to-day usually exists in one of the forms illustrated in
Plate II.

The higher an aerial is placed above the surface of the
earth, the wider will be its electrostatic field, and
consequently more powerful electrical waves will be developed.
But after a height of 180-200 feet is attained, the
engineering difficulties and the expenses increase so rapidly that
few stations exceed it. Other things being equal, the
increased range in transmitting varies as the square of the
height of the radiating wires. For example, a 25-foot
aerial capable of transmitting one mile theoretically will
send waves 16 miles if made 100 feet high. The actual
ratio is often greater, but much is dependent upon the many
meteorological conditions.

After the limit in a vertical direction has been reached,
the only remaining possibilities are to increase the surface
and spread out horizontally.

The flat top aerials are used on shipboard or wherever
it is an advantage to suspend the wires between two masts.

They are especially recommended for amateur use, since
they need not be so high as the other aerials, to be efficient.
The flat top aerials are
directive
, that is, they receive or
radiate waves better in certain directions. The bent or
inverted L type is one of these and exhibits a preference
for waves coming from a direction opposite to that in which
its free end points. This directive action of an inverted
L antenna may be somewhat lessened if the leads are taken
off at the center and it is made a T aerial. This is the
most common form of flat top aerial in use on ships.

The inverted U type is not used extensively because the
two opposite leads or rat-tails make a centrally located
operating room necessary. The loop aerial is used by the
United Wireless Company, in both their ship and land
stations. This type of aerial is well adapted to long waves
and close tuning.

The Lodge-Muirhead capacity aerial does not make use
of a ground and is rarely seen in this country. Lately the
United States Signal Corps have applied it to their balloons
where an earth connection would be impossible. The upper
part of the balloon is covered with a network of wires which
serves as the upper aerial, and a second system of wires is
suspended below the balloon to take the place of the ground.
By this means they have had little difficulty in establishing
successful communication between the balloons and the
earth.

The pyramid aerial is the type used by Marconi in
long-distance ultra-powerful stations, but is debarred
from extensive installation on account of the large cost of
erection.

The cage and grid aerials are of the vertical type and are
excellent where a high support to elevate them can be
secured. They are at present used principally by the Massie
and Stone Companies.

Plate II. Aerial Systems.

The desirable feature of an aerial is a quantity known as
its electrostatic capacity and is measured by the charge
required to raise its potential one unit. An increase in
capacity enables more energy to be accumulated in the
antenna, and consequently greater radiation results. The
capacity of an aerial may be increased by adding wires, but
must not be carried too far or the transmitting apparatus
will not be able to raise its potential sufficiently. Owing
to an effect caused by mutual induction between the wires,
the lines of strain are not distributed symmetrically, and the
capacity will not vary directly but rather approximately
as the square root of the number of wires. In order to
decrease this action and use the surface most efficiently,
the wires should not be placed nearer than one-fiftieth of
their length and preferably farther apart.

The materials used for the insulation and suspension of
an aerial must be reliable, so that in event of bad weather
the station will not lose energy or be put out of working
order because the aerial blew down.

Porcelain cleats or a string of porcelain insulating knobs
make inexpensive insulators. The standard insulator for
wireless telegraph work is the "Electrose" insulator. These
are made of a molded composition, and have iron rings set
firmly in the ends so that they can withstand a very heavy
strain. Hard rubber is undesirable for an aerial insulator
because it becomes carbonized and covered with a
conducting layer.

Fig. 18. Electrose Insulators.

High frequency currents permeate copper wire only about
one three-hundredth of an inch, and so, in order to increase
the surface and decrease the resistance, it is best to make
the aerial of stranded wire. A phosphor bronze wire for
this purpose which is very flexible but still does not sag or
stretch, is composed of 7 strands of No. 20 B. S. gauge.
Such a wire 150 feet long suspended vertically and insulated
from the earth will have a capacity of from 0.0003 to 0.0004
of a microfarad.

The aerial must receive very particular attention if the
station is one kilowatt or over in power. In that case
stranded wire is necessary. The insulation of the aerial
must be as thorough as possible, and proximity to large
conductors such as smokestacks, telephone lines, etc.,
avoided. Rope stays and guys are advisable in order to
prevent dissipation of energy. If wire stays must be used
they should be divided up at frequent intervals by
insulators.

Fig. 19 illustrates a guy insulator used by the United
Wireless Telegraph Company. It is made of two strips
of well paraffined wood separated by two porcelain knob
insulators.

Fig. 19. Guy Insulator.

Copper wire is the most desirable for an aerial. Iron
wire must never be used unless it is very heavily galvanized,
and even then it is not to be recommended. Aluminum
wire is undesirable except for kite sustained aerials. When
used on an aerial and exposed to smoke and other fumes it
becomes quickly coated with a layer of oxide. All
connections made in aluminum wire must be soldered. This
necessity may be better understood when it is explained
that electro-magnets on dynamos, etc., are sometimes
wound with bare aluminum wire and that the natural
coating of oxide on the wire is sufficient insulation to separate
the turns.

Fig. 20. Insulating Tube.

Where the aerial enters the building in which the
instruments are located it must be very carefully insulated. The
simplest method is to bore a hole through the wall and
push a porcelain tube through it. The rat-tail or
leading-in wire is then passed through and the interstices between
it and the tube poured full of melted paraffin.

The best method is to bore a hole in the window pane and
pass the wire through a hard rubber insulating tube. Fig.
20 shows such a tube. It is three-quarters of an inch in
outside diameter and has an internal bore of three-eighths
of an inch. The tube is threaded throughout its entire
length. Two hard rubber flanges inch thick and 2 inches
in diameter are threaded to screw on the tube. The tube
is inserted in the hole in the window pane and the flanges
screwed on either side. If a soft rubber washer is placed
between the hard rubber flanges and the pane there will
be less likelihood of cracking the glass. The leading-in
wire is then passed through the tube. The hole in the
window pane may be bored by using a copper tube having an
external diameter equal to that of the required hole. The
tube is set in a brace and used like an ordinary bit, but must
be kept well smeared with emery and oil or else it will
not cut.

This method of leading in the rat-tail is the only one to
be recommended if the transmitter is one-quarter kilowatt
or over in power.

Fig. 21. High-tension Cable and Insulator.

The lead-in should be anchored just outside of the
window so as to relieve the glass pane and the tube from all
strain. Pirelli cable or the high-tension cable which is
used for the secondary wiring of an automobile is the best
conductor to use for the aerial in the interior of a building.
The way to lead it over the ceiling is to support it on a
porcelain cleat similar to that shown in Fig. 21.

Many are under the erroneous impression that four times
the length of the aerial is the wave length which the station
will emit. This is only at the best a very rough
approximation, for many undeterminable factors such as the nature
and location of surrounding objects, trees, etc., so affect
the capacity and inductance of the aerial that the wave
length must be determined empirically after the aerial is in
operation.

The standard wave length of the United States Navy for
ship installations is 425 meters. An inverted L aerial,
calculated before erection to have a wave length as near
as possible to this, has the following dimensions: Four
horizontal stranded phosphor bronze wires (7 strands No. 20
B. S.) each 160 feet long and spaced 5 feet apart, four
vertical wires 85 feet long and a 35-foot rat-tail.

It is always desirable that the wave length should be as
long as possible, for the waves will then travel farther and
are not absorbed to such an extent by trees, etc. The
absorption due to trees is said to vary as the fourth power
of the frequency.

It is sometimes very convenient to calculate the strain
on insulators or masts caused by a horizontal antenna.
This is easily found by the following equation:

P
equals L² x W/8S

where
P
is the required strain in lbs.,
W
the weight in lbs.
per foot of aerial,
L
the length of the aerial and
S
the sag
of the wire in feet.

When erecting an aerial, it is best to fasten a pulley at
the top of the supporting mast and hoist the aerial up after
the pole is in position. Then in case the wires become
twisted or broken they may be lowered and repaired
without any difficulty.

Erection of an Aerial.
—The average amateur aerial is
generally from 40 to 60 feet high and supported at one end by
a short pole placed on the house and at the other end by a
mast set in the ground or lashed to a tree. Fig. 22
illustrates such an arrangement whereby a flat-top T aerial is
supported at one end by a short pole fastened to the house
and at the other end by a pole set in the ground.

Fig. 22. Flat-top T Aerial.

The flat-top loop aerial is preferred by some amateurs
and it is to be recommended for receiving but is an inefficient
radiator. When this type of aerial is used the two
leading-in wires should be connected to a switch so that when the
switch is closed they are connected. The aerial may then
be used as a straight-away aerial for transmitting, and by
opening the switch, as a loop aerial for receiving. This
precaution is advised when a loop aerial is to be used with
a low-powered induction coil as a transmitter, for
otherwise there will be a loss of energy at the anchor gap.

A large aerial is of no advantage when used with a small
transformer or induction coil because it cannot become
properly charged.

To erect a flat-top T aerial, first select its location. If
possible take advantage of two trees and lash a short pole
in the top of each, so that the aerial may be raised up clear
of the leaves. Another good plan is to erect a pole at each
end of the house. In any case, the distance separating the
poles must not be greater than three times the height above
ground or the directive action of the aerial will be very
pronounced. An aerial 50 to 60 feet high should have a length
of from 80 to 100 feet. Stranded wire is no advantage for
receiving, but must be used if the transmitter is other than
a small induction coil.

Secure two spruce sticks about 2 inches in diameter and
10 feet long. Fasten an insulator 6 inches from each end
of the spars and two more each 3 J feet from the ends. This
arrangement will separate each of the four wires which
compose the aerial by three feet.

The two spars are then laid on the ground at a distance
apart equal to the desired length of the aerial. Four
wires, either stranded or No. 12 B. S. gauge copper, are cut
to equal lengths and fastened to the corresponding
insulators. The middle of each wire is found and a long copper
wire soldered to it. These four wires constitute the
rat-tail or lead-in. They should be of the same length, and are
not connected together until they are about to enter the
building. A short rope tied to each end of the spars and
fastened to the rope which passes over the pulley on the
top of the pole, serves as a bridle to prevent the aerial from
twisting. The aerial is then hoisted up but allowed to hang
slightly slack.

There is considerable difference of opinion among experts
as to whether or not the ends of the horizontal wires should
be connected, and it is impossible to say with good reason
which method is better. However, when erecting a flat
top aerial, exercise every care to make all the wires of
exactly the same length.

An aerial of the size and type just described will send and
receive the following distances.

These distances are only approximate and will vary with
the efficiency of the operator and the location of the station.

When any of the transformers described later are used,
the aerial should be 80 to 100 feet high. In this case the
last named receiving outfit will have a range of from 500 to
1,000 miles.

Ground Connections.
—The importance of a good earth
or ground connection can hardly be overestimated.
Whenever possible commercial stations are located on moist
ground or near a body of water so that a good ground may
be secured by imbedding zinc or copper plates in the earth
or water. A ground on shipboard is easily secured by
fastening a conductor to one of the ship's plates.

If the ground connection is poor, the natural period of
the oscillation circuit is made irregular and short, so that
the currents are choked in passing in and out of the earth.
The result is an undesirable rise of potential at the lower
end of the aerial and often harmful sparking at the ground
connection. The transmitting and receiving ranges of a
station are very considerably reduced through a poor earth.

Ground connection can often be obtained in the country
by immersing metal plates in a well or a cistern. Where
connection is made to a water supply pipe some sort of a
ground clamp should be used to insure a good contact.

Fig. 23. Ground Clamp.

An efficient earth for portable outfits may be quickly
formed by spreading a large area of wire netting over the
ground.

Proper precautions for protection against lightning by
grounding the aerial outside of the building should be
taken.

The wisest plan is to install a heavy single pole double
throw switch outside of the building where the rat-tail
enters. The knife of the switch should be connected to
the aerial, one contact to the house lead and the other to
a heavy wire grounded on the outside of the building as
in Fig. 24. When the apparatus is not in use the aerial
should be grounded by throwing the switch on the grounded
contact.

Fig. 24. Switch for Lightning Protection.

The rulings of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
governing this class of work are appended below.

"1. Aerial conductors to be permanently and effectively
grounded at all times when the station is not in operation
by a conductor not smaller than No. 4 B. S. gauge copper
wire, run in a direct line as possible to water pipe on street
side of said water pipe within the premises or to some other
equally satisfactory earth connection.

"2. Aerial conductors when grounded as above specified
must be effectually cut off from all apparatus within the
building.

"3. Or the aerial to be permanently connected at all
times to earth in the manner specified above, through a
short gap lightning arrester; said arrester to have a gap of
not over .015 of an inch between brass or copper plates not
less than 2 1/2 inches in length, parallel to the gap, and 1 1/2
inches the other way, with a thickness of not less than
one-eighth of an inch, mounted on non-combustible,
non-absorptive insulating material of such dimensions as to
give ample strength. Other approved arresters of equally
low resistance and equally substantial construction may be
used.

"4. In cases where the aerial is grounded as specified in
paragraph 1, the switch employed to join the aerial to the
ground connection shall not be smaller than a standard
100-ampere jack-knife switch.

"Notice of wiring done for these installations should be
sent to the Board, the same as for all other work."

CHAPTER IV. INDUCTION COILS.

Some means of charging the condenser which produces
the oscillatory discharge is necessary. An induction coil
is the most practical for the amateur.

The induction coil consists of a primary coil of wire
wound around a central iron core and surrounded by a
secondary coil consisting of many thousand turns of
carefully insulated wire. The primary coil is connected to a
source of direct current which also includes an interrupter
to "make" and "break" the current in rapid succession.
Every "make" of the circuit and consequent
magnetization of the core induces a momentary inverse current in
the secondary, and every "break" and corresponding
demagnetization a momentary direct current. Normally,
the induced currents would be equal, but by means of a
condenser shunted across the interrupter the circuit when
"made" requires considerable time for the current and
magnetization of the core to reach a maximum value, while
when broken the demagnetization and current drop are
nearly instantaneous. The value of the induced
electromotive force in a circuit varies as the speed at which the
magnetic lines of force cut the circuit, and so the induced
e.m.f. at "break" is thus rendered high enough to leap
across a gap in the shape of sparks.

The formulas connected with induction coils depend upon
conditions which are never met in actual practice and
cannot be relied upon. To construct a coil of a given size, it
is necessary to use dimensions obtained empirically.
Therefore it is well for the amateur to stick closely to lines and
hints which are given here or which appear in some
up to
date
book on induction coil building.

Fig. 25. Diagram of an Induction Coil.

For a long time the induction coil was an expensive,
inefficient instrument, until wireless telegraphy demanded
of it more rigid and efficient design and construction. It
was the aim of manufacturers to produce the longest possible
spark length with a minimum amount of secondary wire.
As a result of this demand, wireless coils are now made
with a core of large diameter and give heavier and thicker
sparks. The secondary in this case is short and uses wire
of large cross section in order to reduce the resistance and
minimize the heating.

No one part of an induction coil may be developed to
its maximum efficiency without seriously influencing and
lowering the efficiency of the other parts. The following
suggestions regarding the construction are given that they
may prove a useful guide to the amateur coil builder.
The parts will be considered in their natural order of
construction.

Core.
—Some experimenters not quite familiar with the
principles of magnetism reason that if an induction coil
were provided with a closed core as the transformer, the
efficiency of the coil would be materially increased. But
this is not so, for the magnetization and demagnetization
of the iron cannot take place rapidly enough in a closed
core when an interrupted direct current is employed in place
of an alternating current.

The core of an induction coil is therefore always straight.
For the same reason, it is never solid but is made up of a
bundle of soft iron wires in order that rapid changes in
magnetism may take place. The wires are always of
as high a permeability
1
as possible so as to create a
strong magnetic field. Swedish or Russian iron of a good
quality is the best, as its hysteresis
2
losses are small.
The smaller the diameter of the wire the less will be the
eddy current losses and heating, but the permeability is
also rendered less and the core will not be so effective, as
the amount of iron is thereby decreased and the oxidized
surface increased. No. 22 B. S. gauge wire is the best size
for the average core.

Wires of a good quality may be purchased already cut
to various lengths. To buy them in this form will save a
great deal of the labor required in building a core. If the
wires are not quite straight they may be straightened by
rolling them, one at a time, between two boards. It is best
to reanneal the wires in the following manner. Place
them in an iron pipe and plug the ends of the pipe with clay.
Then lay it in a coal fire until the whole mass attains a red
heat. The fire is then allowed to die out gradually with
the pipe and wires remaining in the ashes until cool. When
cool remove them from the pipe and rub each one with
emery paper until bright. After this cleaning, the wires
are dipped in hot water and dried. They are then dipped
in a good quality of varnish and allowed to dry again.

Fig. 26. Induction Coil Core.

The varnish serves to interpose resistance to the eddy
currents generated in the core and renders the losses due
to this cause much less. A strong
paper tube having an internal
diameter equal to the diameter of the
finished core is made by rolling the
paper on a form and cementing with
shellac. When perfectly dry. the tube is removed and the
wires tightly packed in it. The following table gives the
core dimensions for practical coils of different sizes.

Primary Winding.
—The ratio of the number of primary
turns of an induction coil to the number of secondary turns
bears no relation to the ratio of the primary and the
secondary currents. It has been found in practice that two layers
of wire wound tightly on the core constitute the best
primary. The primary should always be thoroughly shellacked
or covered with insulating varnish. Since there is almost
no ventilation in the primary the wire must be large enough
to avoid all heating. A table containing the various sizes
of primary wires is given below.

In large coils, the inductance of the primary causes a
"kick back" and sparks are liable to pass between the
adjacent turns. For this reason, it is always well to use double
cotton covered wire and to further thoroughly insulate it by
soaking the primary and core in a pan of melted paraffin
and allowing them to harden therein. Afterwards the pan
is slightly warmed to loosen the cake of paraffin and the
excess of wax removed by scraping with a blunt instrument
so as not to injure the wires. Paraffin contracts upon
hardening, and the proper method to impregnate a porous
substance is to allow it to soak and become set in it upon
cooling.

A good method of reducing the "kick back" and also the
size of the condenser shunted across the interrupter is to
form the primary of a number of turns of smaller wire in
parallel, the effect being to give a conductivity equal to a
single wire of large diameter and at the same time to make
a more compact winding of the primary on the core. This
method of winding is very desirable in large coils, as it
reduces the cross section of the primary and allows the
secondary to be placed nearer the core, where the magnetic
field is the strongest.

The primary winding ought to occupy nearly the whole
length of the core, since there is no gain in carrying the end
of the core very far beyond the end of the primary, for most
of the magnetic lines of force bend at the end of the primary
and return without passing through the extreme ends of
the core.

Insulating Tube.
—The successful operation of an
induction coil without breaking down when under strain
depends largely upon the insulating tube which
separates the primary and secondary. Hard rubber tubes
are perhaps the best. A tube may be easily built up of
several layers of 1/2-inch sheet hard rubber by steaming
it so as to soften it and then wrapping it around a form.
The tube should fit the primary tightly and be about
one inch shorter than the core. After the tube is in place
it is poured full of beeswax and rosin in order to fill all
interstices and prevent sparks due to the condenser effect
of the windings from jumping from the inside of the tube
to the primary.

Secondary.
—A coil used as a wireless telegraph
transmitter must have wire of large cross section in its secondary
so as to obtain a heavy disruptive discharge. Numbers 34
and 32 B. S. are generally used for small coils and numbers
30 and 28 B. S. for large coils. Silk covered wire is the usual
practice, but enameled wire is coming into use. Cotton
covered wire takes up too much space and has poorer
insulating qualities.

Enameled wire is insulated by a coating of cellulose
acetate, which has a dielectric strength of about twice that of
cotton and takes up much less room than silk. There is,
then, with enameled wire a great saving in space, and a
greater number of turns may be placed on the secondary
without increasing its mean distance from the core. The
following table shows the comparative diameters of silk and
enamel covered wires suitable in size for use on the
secondaries of induction coils.

In winding enameled wire it must be taken into
consideration that the insulation of enameled wire is rigid and has
no give. Consequently, to allow for expansion, enameled
wire must be more loosely wound than fiber or silk
covered wire. The occasional
insertion of a layer of paper in
winding will give room for
expansion and at the same time
not add greatly to the diameter.

Fig. 27. Theoretical and practical form of secondary.

The length of the secondary is
generally not much more than
one-half the length of the core.
Coils giving sparks up to 2 inches
in length may be wound in two
sections or in layer windings, but the layer winding is not
recommended for coils giving sparks over one inch. It is
best in a coil of this kind to insert an occasional layer of
paper. The paper should be well shellacked or paraffined
and be of a good grade of linen. It should project about
one-quarter of an inch from the ends of the secondary
as shown by the sectional drawing in Fig. 28.

This insertion of paper increases the insulation and renders
the liability of sparks jumping from layer to layer much less,
as is the case when the layers are very long.

Fig. 28. Layer Winding for Small Coils.

The secondaries of large coils are made up of "pies" or
"pancakes" from one-eighth to three-eighths of an inch in
thickness. The "pies" are separated from each other by a
triple thickness of blotting paper which has been thoroughly
dried and then soaked in melted paraffin. In cutting the
blotting paper, much labor may be saved if a metal template
of the required size is first cut from sheet brass and then
laid on the blotting paper, which is cut by scoring around
the edge of the template with a sharp knife.

Fig. 29. Section Winder.

The "pies" are wound in a bobbin or form such as is
shown in Fig. 29.

The disks or flanges are made of sheet brass and mounted
on an arbor so that the form may be placed in a lathe or
some other contrivance for revolving it. The core is beveled
in order to facilitate the removal of a completed "pie" from
the winder. The flanges of the winder are clamped against
the core by two nuts placed on either side. The "pie" is
removed by unscrewing one of the nuts and removing one
of the flanges.

In winding silk covered wire it is first passed through a
mixture of beeswax and rosin or a bath of melted paraffin.
The excess of wax is removed by passing the wire through a
slit made in a pad of paper or by rubbing against a piece of
felt. Fig. 30 shows such a contrivance.

Fig. 30. Impregnator for Silk Covered Wire.

The wire passes from the reel over an ordinary spool
down into the pan of paraffin, out of the paraffin, over
another spool, and rubs against a piece of felt to remove the
surplus paraffin. The spools are mounted with a screw and
a washer so that they will turn without friction.

The wire is guided, when winding, by the fingers. If it is
wrapped with a piece of felt and held between the thumb
and forefinger it will run without friction and not cut the
fingers. It is necessary that the wire should be closely
watched for kinks, etc. which would cause the wire to
break. Oftentimes the wire is broken but is held together
by the insulation. Therefore each "pie" should be tested
for continuity when completed. This is best accomplished
by means of a galvanometer and battery. All imperfect
"pies" should be rejected, as one of them would cause serious
trouble if embodied in the coil. In soldering the secondary
wires, acid
must not be used
as it soon corrodes the fine wires.
Rosin is the best flux for this purpose. When building a
small coil with a "layer" winding it is absolutely necessary
that the wire should be wound on in smooth even layers. In
a built-up secondary having "pies" not greater than 1/4 inch
in thickness such great care is not necessary.

Fig. 31. Methods of Connecting the Secondary Sections.

Fig. 31 shows the methods of connecting up the pies or
pancakes. In
A
, the inside of one section is connected to
the outside of the next, and so on. The maximum voltage
which can exist between the adjacent sections in this case
is equal to the e.m.f. generated by one "pie" and is equal
throughout. In
B
, the coils are connected alternately inside
and out. The voltage ranges from zero at the points where
they are connected, to a value equal to twice the e.m.f.
developed by one section. It would seem that there would
be a saving in insulation space of one-half in the first case,
but it is not so since the connecting wire passes between the
"pies" and therefore the insulation must be twice as thick
or exactly equal to that in the second case. The latter
method (Fig. 31 B) is the best and most convenient. When
the "pies" are connected in this manner the current must
flow through alternate sections in opposite directions. To
accomplish this it is not necessary to wind every alternate
coil in an opposite direction, but merely to turn them around
and connect them with the direction of their windings
reversed as shown by the arrows and the bevels in Fig. 31.
The connections between the sections must be very
carefully soldered.

After the secondary is assembled the coil should be
placed in a tight receptacle or tank containing melted
paraffin. The tank is then connected to an air pump or
aspirator and the air exhausted. The diminution of
pressure causes any air bubbles in the windings to expand and
be pumped out. After standing a while, the pressure of
the atmosphere is readmitted and the place of the bubbles
will be occupied by paraffin which has been forced in under
pressure.

Mounting.
—A coil for wireless work is best mounted
as shown in Fig. 32 and used with an independent
interrupter. The coil may then be placed under the operating
table or on the wall, out of harm's way, and the
interrupter on the table, where it is handy to the adjustment of
the operator.

Fig. 32. Coil Case.

The case is simply a rectangular hardwood box large
enough to contain the completed coil. Two binding posts
mounted on the side of the box connect with the primary
winding and two on the top of the box lead to the secondary
terminals. The box is filled with boiled oil or melted
paraffin and sealed up by screwing on the lid. If desirable, the
secondary binding posts may be mounted on the top of a
short piece of hard rubber rod as illustrated in the drawing.

[
1
]
Magnetic permeability is the conducting power for lines of magnetic force.

[
2
]
See
hysteresis
under Magnetic Detector.

CHAPTER V. INTERRUPTERS.

We now come to what is the greatest source of trouble
and annoyance in an induction coil, namely the interrupter.
Too much importance cannot be attached to this
instrument, for upon it depends largely the satisfactory working
of the coil. The operation of an induction coil and the
part played by the interrupter were fully explained in the
chapter on induction coils.

An adjustable interrupter is necessary for large coils, that
is, one not only whose speed may be governed, but also the
time and duration of the break.

Fig. 33. Simple Interrupter.

The rapidity of oscillation of a
mechanical interrupter is a
very different thing from the
speed of break. The ideal
speed of break is instantaneous.
In wireless telegraphy, very
faint signals are heard more distinctly in telephone
receivers if the rate of interruption at the station sending
them is high. The human ear is somewhat more sensitive
to sounds higher than those ordinarily produced in the
telephone receivers of a wireless receptor. This seems to
argue the use of a high-speed interrupter to make and break
the current. But the effect on the coil must also be
considered.

In the first place, where a condenser is shunted across
the terminals of the secondary as is the case with a wireless
transmitter, a high-speed interrupter would be very likely
to set up harmful oscillations in the secondary of the coil
itself.

Second, if too fast, the rise and fall of the secondary
currents will be caused to run into each other, since the break
will occur before the primary current has reached a
maximum and the reverse secondary current has died away.

Third, the diameter of the core of a wireless coil is
generally much larger than that of the ordinary coil, and if a very
rapid interrupter is employed there is not time enough to
properly magnetize the core before the current is broken.

Fourth, the strength of the losses in the core caused by
the eddy currents and hysteresis are proportional to the
interruptions in the primary circuit and therefore a low
speed will be the most efficient. A rapid interrupter
requires a higher voltage and amperage than the same
interrupter run at a lower speed.

These are some of the reasons why it is very desirable to
use an atomic interrupter or one so adjustable that the rate
of the time and duration of the "make" and "break" may
be closely regulated. An ideal interrupter is designed to
give the longest time possible after contact is established
and before the "break" occurs.

It does not pay to construct an interrupter for an
induction coil giving sparks up to 2 inches in length. The type
of interrupter in use on automobile coils is perfectly well
adapted to small coils, and may be purchased complete with
the platinum points for as low a price as $1.50.

The mechanical break described below is designed so
that various adjustments are possible and it may be adapted
to almost any coil. Since it is independent, it need not
be mounted directly on the coil, but may be placed in the
position most convenient to the operator for adjustment.
The interrupter will not operate coils well on an
electromotive force above 30 volts, for the excessive voltage causes
a spark at the contacts when the circuit is broken and
prolongs the decadence of the primary current.

Fig. 34. Independent Interrupter.

Independent Atomic Interrupter.
—Fig. 34 illustrates
two views of the interrupter. Current is furnished to the
electromagnets by a six volt battery independent of the
source supplying the coil. The interrupter is set in
operation by closing the circuit breaker on the aerial switch.
When the primary circuit of the transmitter is then
completed by pressing the key, the coil will respond immediately
because the interrupter is already in vibration.

The electromagnets (Fig. 35) are a pair of four ohm
telegraph sounder magnets. A hole is bored in the center of
the top of each magnet core and threaded with an 8-32 tap
so that the pole pieces may be fastened thereto, The shape
and dimensions of these projections, which must be made
of soft iron, are illustrated in Fig. 35.

Fig. 35. Details of Magnets.

A soft iron yoke
Y
, 2 1/2 x 7/8 x 1/4 inches, connects the
bottom of the magnets and supports them in an upright
position. An 8-32 machine screw passing upward through
the base and yoke holds them firmly. The base is
preferably of hard rubber 4 x 3 1/4 x 3/4 inches.

Fig. 36. Details of Moving Parts.

The moving parts are illustrated in Fig. 36. The main
spring,
D
, is a strip of spring steel, 2 1/8 inches long, 1/2 inch
wide, and 1/32 inch thick. The soft iron armature,
A
, is
fastened to the spring by means of two small 4-36 machine
screws.
M
is a piece of brass rod, 1 1/2 inches long, bent in
the form of a hook and threaded with a 4-36 die to screw
in a similarly threaded hole in the back of the armature
A
.
The hooked portion of
M
is fitted with a small piece of hard
rubber rod,
R
, to insulate it where it comes into contact
with the spring,
G
. The spring,
D
, carries a second hook,

E
, riveted to the center of the spring 1 5/8 inches from the
lower end. The hook, which is about 3/8 inch long, passes
through a hole in the top of the spring,
F
, and engages it so
that it is set in operation by the vibratory motion of the
spring,
D
. The spring,
F
, is 1 3/4 inches long, 5/16 inch wide,
and ir 1/64 inch thick. It carries a platinum rivet 3/4 inch from
its lower end. The spring,
G
, is 2 1/2 inches long, 5/16 inch wide
and 1/64 inch thick. A heavy platinum rivet is fastened
2 1/4 inches from the lower end. An elongated hole, 1/4 inch
long and 3/16 inch wide, permits the hook,
M
, to pass through
the opening. A 5/32 inch hole, 1 1/4 inches from the bottom,
allows the adjusting screw to pass through and make
contact with the platinum rivet on the spring,
F
.

Two rectangular pieces of brass,
O
, 1 1/4 x 1/2 x 5/16 inches
are fastened to the base to support the springs.

Fig. 37. Details of Standard and Screws.

The standard,
U
, supporting the adjusting thumbscrews
is a piece of 3/8-inch brass, 2 1/2 inches high. It tapers from
1 1/2 inches at the bottom to 3/4 inch at the top. A hole 2 1/4
inches from the bottom is threaded with a 10-32 tap to
receive the thumbscrew,
B
. A second hole 1 1/4 inches from
the base is threaded with an 8-32 tap to fit the adjusting
screw,
S
.

Both of the adjusting thumbscrews carry heavy platinum
points. The standard is held upright to the base by means
of two machine screws passing through the base.

A 3/32 inch brass rod 1 3/4 inches long is threaded to fit a hole
in the top of the armature. A sliding weight,
W
, may be
clamped in any position on the rod by means of a
thumb-screw. Raising or lowering the position of the weight
decreases or increases the natural period of vibration of
the interrupter. Screwing the hook,
M
, in or out so as to
shorten or lengthen it, decreases or increases the ratio of
the make to the break.

Fig. 38. Diagram of Connections for an Independent Interrupter.

Fig. 38 shows a diagram of the connections of the
interrupter. The standard, the thumbscrew,
B
, and the spring,

G
, form part of the primary circuit of the induction coil.
The standard, the thumbscrew,
S
, the spring,
F
, and the
electromagnets are placed in series with a six-volt battery
and connected to the circuit breaker on the aerial switch,
so that when the switch is thrown in position for
transmitting, the interrupter will be set in operation.

A condenser must be shunted across the larger contacts
of the interrupter in order to hasten the demagnetization
of the core of the induction coil and create a higher e.m.f.
in the secondary. The condenser must be suited in size
to the induction coil with which the interrupter is to be used
and so the following table is appended to serve as a guide.

The condensers are built up of alternate sheets of tin foil
and paraffined paper. Connections are made to the sheets
by means of tin foil strips which project out alternately
from opposite sides as in the illustration.

The paper should be about two inches larger each way
so as to leave a one inch margin on all sides of the tin foil.

Fig. 39. Construction of a Paper Condenser.

When the alternate sheets of
tin foil and paper have all been
assembled, the condenser is
warmed so as to soften the
paraffin. It is then placed
between two flat boards and subjected to great pressure
in a letter press or a vice. The capacity of a pressed
condenser is often several times that of a condenser of the
same dimensions but not pressed.

Mercury Interrupters.
—The mercury turbine interrupter is
one of the most convenient and successful breaks
in use. The construction is such that a stream of mercury
is made to play against a number of saw shaped metal teeth.
A spiral worm terminating in a nozzle at the top is rapidly
revolved by an electric motor. The lower end of the
tubular worm dips in a mercury reservoir, so that when the
spiral is revolved the mercury is caused by centrifugal
action to rise in the tube and be thrown out in the form of
a jet at the upper end. When the revolving jet strikes
one of the metal teeth, the circuit is closed and the current
flows from the mercury jet into the teeth. When the
mercury jet passes between the openings between the teeth,
the circuit is interrupted. By raising and lowering the saw
teeth so that the mercury strikes either the lower or upper
part of them, the ratio between the make and break may be
made smaller or larger. By regulating the speed of the
motor driving the jet, the number of interruptions may be
varied from 10 to 10,000 per second. The bottom and
sides of the mercury reservoir are ribbed to prevent the
mercury from attaining a rotary motion.

A somewhat simpler and more easily constructed type
of mercury interrupter consists of a hard rubber disk
having a brass rod running through from the periphery to
the center, where it connects with the shaft. The lower
edge of the disk dips at an angle in a mercury bath and
is rapidly revolved by an electric motor. When the rod
is under the surface of the mercury, the circuit is made
through the mercury to the rod. The circuit is broken
when the rod is above the surface. The mercury is covered
with a layer of alcohol, which prevents excessive sparking
and makes a quicker break. An interrupter of this kind
when run by a motor of the magnetic attraction type is
exceedingly simple.

The break of any of the mercury type interrupters when
properly adjusted is much quicker than the hammer spring
break and gives thicker sparks.

After the mercury has been in use awhile it becomes
churned up into small globules of a black color, but may be
easily cleaned and restored for use by shaking up with some
strong sulphuric acid. Care must be taken that the
mercury is perfectly dry and free from acid before replacing
in the interrupter.

Electrolytic Interrupters.
—Fig. 40 shows a diagram
of a Wehnelt interrupter. The cathode or negative
electrode is a lead plate immersed in dilute sulphuric acid. The
anode is a piece of platinum wire placed in a porcelain
tube and projecting through a small hole in the bottom, so
that only a very small surface of the wire is exposed to the
liquid. When a strong electrical current is passed through
the acid electrolyte, the current is very rapidly interrupted
by the formation of gases on the small platinum electrode.
The speed of the interrupter is variable through great
ranges by moving the platinum electrode up or down and
changing the amount of surface
exposed to the liquid. The only
disadvantage of this interrupter is
that the electrolyte soon becomes
heated, and unless the interrupter
is provided with a water jacket or
some device for cooling, the bubbles of gas do not form
freely. A potential of at least 40 volts is required to
operate a Wehnelt or other electrolytic break.

Fig. 40. Wenhelt and Simon Electrolytic Interrupters.

A Wehnelt interrupter may easily be made by sealing a
platinum wire in a glass tube. It is well to make several
such tubes with the platinum projecting from one-sixteenth
to one-quarter of an inch. The different tubes will each
have a different speed of interruption, and one should be
picked out which seems to be most suitable for the coil
upon testing. Connection to the platinum wire is
established by filling the tube with mercury and dipping a wire
in it.

Fig. 40 also shows a diagram of a Simon electrolytic
interrupter. It consists of a vessel containing dilute
sulphuric acid and divided into two parts by a thin
porcelain diaphragm having a small hole in the center. A lead
electrode dips into each of the divisions. The
interruption is caused by exceeding a certain current density
in the small hole at the diaphragm. Upon the passage
of the current the liquid is so heated that it becomes
vaporized. The vapor is a poor conductor to low voltages and
so the current is broken. Immediately upon the cessation
of the current, the vapor condenses and the circuit is
established again. This cycle repeats itself with a speed
depending upon the size of the aperture and the amount of
current flowing.

A crude form of this type of interrupter may be made
by heating the end of a test tube in a pin flame, and then
blowing on the open end of the tube so as to burst the soft
glass and form a small hole. Several such test tubes should
be prepared having holes varying from 1/32 to 1/8 of an inch in
diameter. The one which gives the best results upon trial
is selected for use. A number of holes in a single tube, if
not too many or too large in diameter, increases the
efficiency and the speed of interruption. The tube should
be immersed in a glass jar containing dilute sulphuric acid.
One lead electrode is placed inside of the test tube and the
other outside. It makes no difference which way the
current flows through this interrupter.

The Caldwell interrupter is a modification of the Simon
type in which the size of the aperture is made adjustable
by means of a pointed glass rod which may be raised or
lowered in the hole and the speed of interruption varied.
An interrupter of the test tube type as described above
may be modified to this form by locating the hole directly
in the center of the bottom of the tube and inserting
in it a hard glass rod which has been drawn out to a
point.

Electrolytic interrupters do not require any condenser
connected across the break.

Fig. 41. Construction of Electrolytic Interrupters.

Fig. 41 shows in section more substantial forms of both
the Wehnelt and Simon-Caldwell interrupters. The
containers are ordinary 5 x 7 inch battery jars. They are
fitted with covers made of two thicknesses,
C
and
B
, of
3/4-inch wood. The upper piece,
C
, is 6 inches in diameter,
while the under one should fit snugly into the interior of
the jar. The wood must be boiled in paraffin to protect
it from the action of the acid. A slit is made in the
left-hand side of both covers for the passage of a lead
electrode,
L
, 1 inch wide and 1/4 inch thick. The upper end
of the electrode is bent over and fitted with a binding
post.

Fig. 42. Details of Electrolytic Interrupters.

The mechanism for adjusting the interrupters is the same
in both cases. The dimensions are indicated in Fig. 42.
A brass yoke,
Y
, is mounted on the cover in the position
shown. A 1/2-inch hole is bored through the upper part of
the yoke and a piece of brass tubing,
S
, 1 inch long soldered
in a vertical position in the hole. A 1/4-inch threaded brass
rod passes through the tube, 5. A groove is milled in A
along its entire length and engages a pin in the wall of
S
.
The rod is thus enabled to slide up and down in the tube
but is prevented from revolving. A fiber head,
H
, is fitted
with a brass sleeve or bushing in its center. The bushing
should fit tightly into the fiber head and is threaded to fit
the rod,
A
. The electrode may then be carefully raised or
lowered by revolving the head. The tube,
V
, for the
Simon-Caldwell interrupter is a hard glass test tube. A 1/8-inch
hole is blown in the bottom of the tube. A hard glass rod,

G
, is drawn out to a point and fastened to the lower end of
the rod,
A
, by means of a short length of flexible rubber
tubing,
R
.

The tube, N, for the Wehnelt break is made from a piece
of hard rubber tubing 6 inches long, having a bore of J inch.

Fig. 43. Electrolytic Interrupter.

The lower end is fitted with a
spark plug porcelain. The
porcelain must fit the tube tightly and
not leak. The electrode,
P
, is a
piece of brass wire which will just
pass through the hole in the
porcelain. The upper end of the
electrode,
P
, is soldered or fastened
otherwise to the lower end of the
rod,
A
.

A small hole,
h
, should be made
in the tubes,
N
and
V
, above the
level of the electrolyte in the jar.
When the interrupter is in
operation the electrolyte gradually rises
in the tubes, and would corrode the
lower end of
A
if it were not able to
pass out through the vents.

In the Simon-Caldwell
interrupter, a strip of lead passes
from the binding post mounted on the foot of the yoke
down inside of the test tube. The size of the hole in the
tube is regulated by revolving the fiber head so that
the glass pointed rod will be inserted in or withdrawn from
the hole.

The frequency of the interruption will also depend
somewhat on the concentration of the acid solution. It is
therefore best to start with a weak solution and add acid slowly
until it is of the proper strength.

CHAPTER VI. TRANSFORMERS.

Where alternating current is available in commercial
wireless telegraph stations, the induction coil has been
gradually superseded by the more modern transformer for
charging the oscillation condenser. Since the transformer
is less expensive to construct than an induction coil capable
of transmitting the same distance, it is favored by many
amateur experimenters. A one quarter kilowatt
transformer has a sending range of over 50 miles when used with
a properly constructed aerial about 80 feet high. This is
probably the size best suited to the average private
installation.

The secondary of a wireless transformer seldom develops
potentials exceeding 15,000 to 20,000 volts, while those of an
induction coil range from 1 5,000 to 300,000 volts. However,
the strength of the secondary current of a transformer is so
much greater than that of an induction coil, that more
powerful and penetrating waves are developed. For these
reasons a transformer is always rated by its output in watts
or kilowatts rather than by the spark length produced at
the secondary terminals. The spark of a one quarter
kilowatt transformer is only 0.25 to 0.50 of an inch, while the
spark of a one half kilowatt transformer may be the same
length but still represent more energy.

There are two distinct types of transformers in use, known
as the "open" and "closed," accordingly whether the core
is straight like the core of an induction coil or in the form
of a hollow rectangle. The open core type is used in the
government stations and by the United Wireless Telegraph
Co. It is the simpler and more easily constructed of the
two, but is also less efficient and requires that more material
be expended to bring it up to a definite rating. In principle
it is simply an induction coil operated on alternating
current minus the interrupter and condenser. In view of
the greater currents employed, the windings must be larger
and heavier than those of the induction coil to prevent
heating.

Before commencing the construction of a transformer one
should read the chapter on induction coils and use the same
care emphasized there in regard to building coils.

Open Core Transformer.
—The transformer described
below will transmit from 20 to 75 miles and consume about
300 watts on the no volt 60 cycle alternating current.

The core is 16 inches long and 2 inches in diameter. It
is built up of soft iron wires in the same manner as if it
were the core of an induction coil.

The primary is composed of two layers of No. 14 double
cotton covered B. S. gauge magnet wire. The primary is
14 inches long and is wrapped with a layer of micanite cloth
3/8 inch thick to separate it from the secondary winding.

It is never advisable to use shellacked cotton cloth as
insulation. When cotton is dried and shellacked, it is at
first a good insulator, but soon becomes capable of
absorbing moisture. Shellac carbonizes at a low temperature, and
if a transformer or coil having any of this sort of insulation
entering into its construction is overheated, the insulation
is liable to become a conductor. Micanite cloth is the
best insulation for transformers. The dielectric strengths
of the different forms of micanite are shown by the
following table.

The secondary is wound in ten sections over the micanite
insulation. Each section is 6 inches in diameter and 1 1/4
inches thick and is wound with No. 30 B. S. single silk
covered wire. The sections are separated by disks of
blotting paper 1/8 inch thick and 7 inches in diameter, treated as
described in Chapter IV. The completed transformer
should be placed in a box and covered with oil.

A One Quarter Kilowatt Closed Core Transformer.

The simplest form of a closed core transformer consists of
two independent coils of insulated wire wound upon an iron
ring. When an alternating current is passed through one
of the coils, known as the primary, it generates a magnetic
flux in the iron core. The lines of force passing through
the core induce in the secondary coil an electromotive force
the magnitude of which is in nearly the same ratio to the
primary inducing electromotive force as the number of turns
of wire in the secondary is to the number of turns in the
primary. For example, if it is desired to raise the potential
of the no volt alternating current to 22,000 volts, the
number of turns in the secondary of the transformer must be at
least 200 times the number in the primary.

A circular ring of iron wire presents several theoretical
advantages as a transformer core but it would be difficult to
form and afterwards place the windings in position. The
core is therefore usually in the form of a hollow rectangle,
built up of very thin sheets or laminations of soft iron
carefully insulated from one another by a coat of varnish. If
the core were solid or the separate laminations not
insulated from one another, heavy currents, known as eddy
currents, would be set up in the iron and cause heating. A
considerable loss in the efficiency of the transformer would
also result.

One half of both the secondary and the primary windings
of a properly designed transformer are placed on opposite
sides or "legs" of the core in order to reduce the magnetic
leakage and increase the efficiency. The only difficulty
involved in such construction is the proper insulation of
the primary from the secondary, but if careful attention is
given to this point no difficulty will be experienced.

Core.
—The dimensions and method of assembling the
core laminations are indicated by Fig. 44. Long strips are
cut from soft Russian or Swedish stovepipe iron. The strips,
which are 1 3/4 inches wide are then cut up into short lengths,
one half of which are 7 3/4 inches long and the other half 4 3/4
inches. Enough are cut to form two piles of each size 1 3/4
inches high when compressed. The completed core will then
form a hollow rectangle 9 1/2 x 6 1/2 x 1 3/4 inches.

Fig. 44. Assembly and Dimensions of Core.

The strips must be dipped in some good insulating
varnish such as P. & B. compound and thoroughly dried before
they are assembled. Both "legs" (the longest sides) are laid
on a table with the alternate ends overlapping as shown by

A
and
B
in Fig. 44. After the short pieces
C
and
D
have
been slipped between the overlapping ends the whole core is
squared up. The strips
D
are then carefully removed and
one end of the core thus left open until all the windings are
in place. Three or four layers of well varnished linen cloth
are wound tightly over the "legs" preparatory to winding
on the primary.

Primary.
—Four fiber heads,
H
, 4 3/4 inches square, 1/2 inch
thick and having a square hole 1 7/8 x 1 7/8 inches cut in the
center are required. One of the fiber heads is placed on each
end of the assembled "leg" as shown in Fig. 48.

Fig. 45. Fiber Head and Separator.

The primary winding is wound in six layers, 4 1/2 inches
long, three layers on each "leg." About three pounds of
No. 16 B. S. gauge double cotton covered magnet wire are
required for the winding. The terminals of the two halves
of the primary are led through the fiber heads at the same
end of the transformer. The windings are not to be carried
close up to the fiber heads but begin and end about 1/4 inch
from them, so that the remaining space may be filled by
winding in a strip of micanite cloth 1/4 inch wide. The
primary and secondary windings are separated by a strip of
micanite cloth 5 inches wide, wound over both of the
primary windings close up to the heads until a layer 1/2 inch
thick is formed.

Secondary.
—The form on which the secondary sections
are wound is illustrated in Fig. 46. All the parts are cut
out of wood except the shaft and are made of the
dimensions indicated. If the center of the form is slightly tapered
it will greatly facilitate the removal of the completed
sections. Sixteen sections are required. When removed
from the winder they will be in the form of hollow squares
4 1/2 x 4 1/2 x 7/16 inches.

Fig. 46. Section Form.

About ten pounds of No. 34 B. S. gauge silk covered
wire are required to wind the sections. Cotton covered wire
must not be used to avoid expense, because with it a
sufficient number of secondary turns cannot be secured to bring
the secondary current up to the proper voltage. By
observing explicitly the instructions and precautions given below
no trouble will be experienced in handling enameled wire
and forming the sections. The form should be placed in a
lathe chuck or some other machine which is convenient and
whereby the form may be rapidly revolved under the
control of the operator.

Saw slots are cut in the wooden flanges and the center of
the form as shown in the illustration so that silk threads
may be passed under and around the completed section and
tied so that a possible "cave in" of the wire is prevented.
After tying up the section should be removed from the form
by unscrewing the nut and taking off the flange.

Fig. 47. Methods of Connecting Sections.

When winding the wire it must be very carefully watched
for loops or kinks and only be laid on in even layers. It
must also be borne in mind that enameled wire cannot be as
tightly wound as fiber covered wire for reasons heretofore
explained. In case the wire becomes broken, it must be
smoothly spliced and soldered. Do not under any
consideration use acid as a flux or heat the wire with a flame. Acid
will corrode the fine wire, and the flame will badly oxidize
or melt it. Use a short piece of No. 8 B. S. gauge tinned
copper wire set in a small file handle as a soldering iron,
and rosin as a flux. Paraffin some silk binding tape such
as dressmakers use and wrap the joint with a small piece.
The sections as they are removed from the winder must
be taped and then carefully marked with an arrow which
points in the direction of the winding.

Fig. 47 illustrates the two methods of connecting up the
sections. It will be noticed in the second method that the
arrow denoting the direction of winding points down on
every alternate section. This does not indicate necessarily
that every alternate section is wound in an opposite
direction from the other, but that they have merely been turned
around so that the arrows come on a reverse side of the core
and point in an opposite direction. This precaution must
be taken in order that the current will flow through all the
sections, and is made necessary because the inside terminal
of one section is connected to the inside terminal of the
adjacent section and the outside terminal of that section is
connected to the outside terminal of the next adjacent section.
The first method,
A
, illustrated in Fig. 44, is less
complicated and does not require this reversal, but for various
reasons is not to be recommended in place of
B
.

Eight of the completed and taped sections are placed on
each "leg" of the transformer, with one of the fiber
separators between each pair as in Figs. 48 and 49. When each
"leg" has been completely assembled, solder all the
secondary terminals together so as to connect as in Fig. 47.

Fig. 48. Assembly of Leg.

Then place the remaining fiber head,
S
, on each of the
"legs" and finish assembling the core by slipping in the end
strips
D
.

Square the core up perfectly true and fasten by four fiber
strips
M
, Fig. 49, 9 3/4 inches long, 1 3/4 inches wide and 1/2-inch
thick. The strips are placed in the position shown in Fig.
46 and a hole
P
bored in the end of each. Four 1/4-inch
bolts, two of which are 3 inches long and two 3 1/2 inches, pass
through the holes in the strips, so that when the nuts are
screwed on the core is clamped firmly. The two longer
bolts are placed at the same end of the transformer.

Fig. 49. Transformer with One Secondary removed.

The terminals of the primary lead out to four binding
posts mounted on the fiber strips. The pillars which
support the secondary binding posts are fiber rods, 1 inch in
diameter and 2 inches long. The lower end of each is bored
and tapped to fit the upper ends of the longer bolts which
clamp the fiber strips together. An insulating shield must
be placed between the two secondary windings to prevent
sparks from jumping across. A piece of fiber 5 x 5 x 1/8
inches will serve nicely for this purpose. If the primary
windings are placed in series the transformer will consume
about 300 watts. When the transformer is placed in a box
and the box filled with some boiled amber petroleum, the
windings may be connected in parallel and the transformer
will consume about 500 watts. It will then transmit over
100 miles providing the aerial is at least 100 feet high.

The wiring connections are diagramed in Fig. 50.
A variable inductance or reactance coil is connected in
series with the primary circuit to steady the current, as
explained in the paragraph under reactance. A reactance
suitable for this transformer may be constructed by winding
two layers of No. 12 B. S. gauge cotton covered wire, six
inches long, around a hollow wooden tube made of cigar box
wood. The core is built up of soft sheet iron to form a
rectangle 8 x 1 3/4 x 1 3/4 inches which will just slide in and out
of the tube. The windings should be about six inches long.

Fig. 50. Wiring Diagram.

Five half-gallon Leyden jars form about the right capacity
for the secondary of the transformer when the windings are
in series. Twice that number must be used when the
windings are in parallel.

The secondary sections must always be kept in series, as
otherwise the voltage would not be high enough to properly
charge the condenser.

Construction of a 2-K.W. Transformer.

Core.
—Strips 2 1/2 inches wide are cut from soft sheet
iron. One half of them should be 11 1/2 inches long and the
other half 6 1/2 inches. Enough are cut to make two piles of
each size 2 1/2 inches high. Both sides (the longest strips) of
the core are built up with the ends overlapping as in Fig. 41.

The ends (the short pieces) are then slipped between the
overlapping ends of the long strips and the whole core
squared up. The completed core should have a cross
section of 2 1/2 inches square and form a hollow rectangle 8 x 14
inches. The strips of iron must be dipped in P. & B.
insulating varnish and dried before they are assembled.

Primary.
—Four fiber heads 6 inches square, 1/2 inch
thick and having a hole 2 1/2 inches square are made. One of
these is placed on the core legs as shown by Fig. 48. Two
or three layers of well varnished linen are wound over the
core preparatory to winding the primary. Room must be
left for the other head to be placed on the opposite end after
the windings are all in place. The primary consists of 100
double turns of No. 12 B. S. gauge double cotton covered
magnet wire. Fifty of the double turns are wound on each
leg. The four terminals of the primary are led out through
the fiber heads. Care should be taken to distinguish them
from each other so that they may be identified when the
transformer is completed. The primary is then wound with
a strip of micanite or empire cloth 8 inches wide until it
measures 4 inches square over all.

Secondary.
—The secondary coils, which are eight in
number, are wound on a form 4 inches square and 1 1/2 inches
between the flanges. The construction of the form is similar
to that shown in Fig. 46 but is larger. The slots are also
necessary here so that the completed section may be tied up.

About ten pounds of No. 30 B. S. gauge single silk covered
wire are required to wind the secondary. The sections are
wound in smooth even layers until they are six inches in
outside diameter. They are then tied up and removed from
the winder. The sections are separated by sheets of fiber
6 1/2 inches square on the outside, 1/2 inch thick, having a hole
4 inches square cut in the center. The sections are all
connected in series and the terminals soldered to strips of
copper.

After the secondary coils are all in place and connected,
the fiber head is slipped on the end of the leg. Then the
short lengths of the core, which had been pulled out again
after squaring the core up, are slipped into place. The
core is squared up again and fastened together by boring
a 3/8-inch hole completely through the core at each corner.
Two strips of fiber 12 x 2 1/2 x 1/2 inches are bored with
corresponding holes in their ends. These strips are placed
at the end of the transformer, on top of the core, and 1/4-inch
bolts passed through the holes in the fiber and the core.
The bolts are wrapped with micanite cloth where they pass
through the core, and an insulating washer is placed under
the nuts, so that the iron core laminations are not electrically
connected. The nuts are tightened until the core is held
firmly together.

The fiber strips also serve as insulated supports for the
binding posts. The copper terminals of the secondary lead
to two binding posts mounted on two fiber or hard rubber
pillars 1 inch diameter and 4 inches high. The rods are
arranged as explained in the section under the heading of
a 1/4-K.W. transformer.

The transformer is designed for use on a 60-cycle
110-volt current. It may be used on 220 volts if the two
primary coils are connected in series. When the primaries
are in series, and the transformer is used on the 110-volt
current, it will deliver a voltage of about 12,000 at the
secondary. With either primary alone the voltage will
be about 12,000, and with both in parallel about 25,000.
It will then deliver a very heavy current at the secondary
and draw from the line about 20 amperes in the primary.
If used with a proper tuning helix, condenser and aerial, the
transformer is capable of sending about 300 miles under
favorable conditions.

If the transformer is to be used for long periods at a time,
it is best to place it in a tight wooden box 18 inches square
and 12 inches deep. The box is then filled with boiled
linseed oil or amber petroleum.

A rheostat or impedance and reactance coil should be
placed in series with the transformer to regulate the current
and also to prevent arcing across the spark gap.

Reactance.
—In Chapter I, the lag and lead of a circuit
were explained in connection with tuning. This is a
property of every alternating circuit and is brought to our
notice again in the transformer which charges the condenser.
The current developed by a transformer is a leading current,
since the instantaneous values of the current do not
correspond to the proportionate values of the voltage supplying
the current. In order to force the current values of the
charging current to correspond with the voltage it is
necessary to produce a "lag." This is accomplished by means
of an adjustable reactance in series with the primary of the
transformer.

A reactance or inductance suitable for the 2-K.W.
transformer may be made by building up a coil in the same
manner as described under the heading of the J-K.W.
transformer. The reactance will have to be somewhat
larger on account of the heavier currents. The core is
built up of sheet iron to measure 2 1/2 x 2 1/2 x 10 inches when
completed. The coil is wound around a wooden form and
is composed of about 100 turns of No. 8 B. S. gauge double
cotton covered magnet wire. By varying the amount of
core inserted in the hollow coil the energy may be adjusted
as desired.

Fig. 51. Clapp-Eastham 1/4-K.W. Transformer.

Fig. 51 illustrates the 1/4-K.W. transformer manufactured
by the Clapp-Eastham Company. The core is so
constructed that a small metal tongue of soft iron projects
from one side of the core towards the opposite side between
the windings, but is separated from the opposite side by a
small air gap. Several objects are accomplished by this
tongue, which gives rise to magnetic leakage; the
inductance of the primary is increased thereby to such an
extent that the transformer is self-controlling, so that it
may be connected directly to the source of alternating
current supply of ordinary commercial frequencies and
potential, and the current flowing in this circuit be regulated by
varying the number of turns in the primary coil. As this
magnetic leakage gives rise to a loose coupling effect, the
primary and secondary circuits may be brought into
resonance by placing a suitable capacity across the secondary
terminals. This condition of resonance brings the power
factor to a materially higher percentage. While the power
factor of the open or closed core transformer is seldom
above 50%, this type of transformer has a power factor of
80 to 90% when used with a suitable condenser.

Fig. 52. United Wireless Motor-Generator set for supplying Alternating Current to the Transformer.

Another point of considerable advantage is the almost
entire freedom from arcing at the spark gap when this type
of transformer is used. The spark gap is connected directly
across the secondary terminals of the transformer and the
condenser. The primary turns of the helix and the spark
gap are connected in series. When the transformer is in
operation, this condenser being across the secondary, the
transformer is in resonance and the condenser is charged
to such a point that it will jump the spark gap. At the
instant that the spark passes, the secondary of the
transformer is practically short circuited through the spark gap.
As this circuit is now closed and the condenser out of circuit,
the secondary circuit of the transformer is no longer in
resonance and the energy immediately drops off, destroying
at once the tendency for an arc to form. As soon as the
spark has passed, the condenser of course comes in to play and
the condition of resonance being reestablished the same
process is repeated. The Clapp-Eastham Company have made
application for a patent on any transformer employing this
or any similar construction for use in charging a condenser.

CHAPTER VII. OSCILLATION CONDENSERS AND LEYDEN JARS.

A condenser consists of two conducting surfaces
separated by an insulator or dielectric. Fig. 53 shows a
diagram of a simple condenser in which
A
and
B
are two
tinfoil sheets separated by a sheet of glass,
C
.

Fig. 53. Simple Condenser.

If
A
is connected by means of a wire to a static machine
a positive charge will collect on the glass at
A
and induce
a negative charge at
B
, so that if
A
and
B
are connected to a
small spark gap the charge will leap the gap in the form of
a spark.

When a condenser discharges through a coil of wire, the
discharge consists of a large number of exceedingly rapid
oscillations or surgings. The first passage of current more
than empties the condenser and it becomes charged in the
opposite direction, that is, the conducting coatings change
their polarity. A reverse discharge then occurs which also
oversteps itself and the oscillations thus go on but become
rapidly weaker until they die completely. The time
consumed in the discharge may have been only a fraction of a
second, but during that short period the current perhaps
oscillated several thousand times.

If a condenser is discharged through a conductor of high
resistance the discharge passes out slowly, and dies away
gradually in one direction without oscillating. One of the
fundamental equations of wireless telegraphy is therefore
that there will be oscillations in a circuit if the resistance in
ohms is not greater than the square root of four times the
inductance in henries divided by the capacity of the
condenser in microfarads.

The capacity or the ability of a condenser to store
electricity depends upon the area and form of the conducting
surfaces, the thickness of the dielectric between them, and
a factor known as the specific inductive capacity of the
dielectric. The unit of capacity is called the farad and is
defined as the condenser which would be raised to a potential
of one volt by a charge of one ampere flowing for one second.
A condenser of such a capacity is, because of its enormous
size, impractical to construct, and the unit ordinarily used
is therefore the microfarad, or one millionth of a farad.

Capacity may be calculated from the following formula:

Capacity equals K(A/D),

where
K
equals a constant depending upon the specific
inductive capacity of the dielectric,
A
the total area of
tinfoil and
D
the thickness of the dielectric.

Leyden Jars.
—Transmitting condensers in a wireless
telegraph station usually take the convenient form of a
jar, coated inside and out with tinfoil and known as a
Leyden jar.

The jars should be of good Bohemian or Jena hard glass
and coated with tinfoil only for about three-quarters of
their height, as otherwise the discharge is liable to pass over
the top. The tinfoil must be thick to avoid blistering,
and is stuck to the glass with shellac varnish. The
blistering of Leyden jars is a serious fault, for when this condition
exists, the capacity is thereby altered to such an extent that
the period of the closed circuit may be sufficiently altered
to throw the system out of tune and decrease the radiation
of energy.

Considerable expense may be saved if the glass jars are
purchased and coated by the amateur. The best jars are
those imported from Germany, which have wide mouths
so that they may be easily coated inside with tinfoil.

Fig. 54. Leyden Jar.

The jars must be
thoroughly
cleaned and dried before they
are coated. Give the inside a thorough brushing over with
shellac varnish, and before it is dry, carefully insert the
tinfoil and press it smoothly against the glass. The outside
of the jar is treated and coated in the same manner. The
inside and outside of the bottom are also coated by cutting
the tinfoil in circular pieces and shellacking them on.

Fig. 55. "Aerial Switch."

The whole upper part of the jar is given one or two
coats of shellac in order to prevent the collection of
moisture and brush discharging.
A wooden plug fitted in the top
of the jar supports a brass rod,
terminating at the lower end in
a chain or spiral spring which
connects with the inner coating.
When trouble is experienced
because of an imperfect contact
between the coating and the chain or rod, a layer of brass
filings an inch or two deep placed in the bottom of
the jar will remedy the difficulty. The upper end of
the rod usually terminates in a small brass ball or a
binding post.

The wooden plug or cover is dried in an oven to expel all
moisture and then boiled in paraffin.

Small Leyden jars may be very conveniently made from
six-inch test tubes and mounted in a rack so that the
capacity of the condenser will be adjustable by removing one or
more of the tubes. An ordinary test tube rack such as is
used in chemical laboratories serves very well for this
purpose. The tubes should be connected in parallel, that is,
all the outside coatings together and all the inside coatings
together.

Figs. 55 and 56 illustrate condensers of this type which
are on the market. The tubes are all separately removable
so that the capacity may be adjusted.

Fig. 56. Amco Oscillation Condenser.

Glass Plate Condensers.
—Glass plate condensers offer
several advantages over Leyden jars and are coming into
wide use. They are not so bulky or expensive and, above
all, do not blister.

Plate condensers are often placed in a rack and made
adjustable by means of movable contacts. Much the
better plan is to place the plates in oil, as this eliminates all
corona or brush discharges and much sharper tuning is
rendered possible. The container is usually a tight wooden
box filled with oil or paraffin after the plates are in place.

It is impossible to state the size of condenser suitable for
induction coils of a given power or spark length, because
many factors such as inductance, length of aerial, etc.,
which differ in various stations, influence the capacity. A
condenser of convenient size suitable for coils or small
transformers consuming from 250 to 300 watts is that described
below. It is about the proper size for the small open core
and 1/4-K.W. closed core transformers, described in the last
chapter.

Fig. 57. Clapp-Eastham Oscillation Condenser.

The glass plates may be secured by removing the emulsion
from old 8 x 10 inch photograph plates. Hot water will
soften the gelatin on the plates so that it may be very easily
scraped off. Twenty-four plates of this size are required.
The tinfoil is cut 8 x 8 inches, so that an inch margin is left
on all sides. The alternate sheets are connected together
by heavy tinfoil or thin copper foil strips. The condenser
should be placed in a convenient sized wooden box and
poured full of paraffin.

The plate condenser shown in Fig. 57 is of .02 microfarad
capacity. The condenser is mounted in a plain wooden
box with several binding posts brought out, so that the
capacity may be varied by connecting in various sections.
The condenser is manufactured and designed by the
Clapp-Eastham Company for use with the transformer illustrated
in Fig. 51.

It is very necessary to have the transmitting condenser
adjustable so that its capacity may be varied, for the proper
value depends upon the wave length, spark frequency,
power and persistency of the wave train.

When the condenser capacity is too small the spark will
be somewhat flaming like an arc, and the potential to which
the aerial is charged will be low. If too much capacity is
used the spark will be very irregular and intermittent.

Fig. 58. Methods of Varying Capacity.

Fig. 58 shows condensers connected in series and in
parallel and a combination of the two. Two condensers of
equal capacity connected in parallel have twice the capacity
of one, while in series they will have only one-half the
capacity of either. This may be otherwise stated as the capacity
in series is equal to the reciprocal of the sum of the
reciprocals of their capacities separately. By this means of
connecting either in series or in parallel almost any desired
adjustment of capacity may be brought about.

Oftentimes a high voltage may be divided between two
condensers by placing them in series and thus using them
safely on a voltage which would rupture either one alone.
For example, two condensers built for 20,000 volts and to
be used on 30,000 volts could be made to perform this duty
safely and only undergo a potential of 15,000 volts, which
is a large margin of safety.

It is obvious that if the capacity of the circuit were to
remain constant, four condensers connected up in
series-parallel would be necessary.

In case of several Ley den jars or condensers connected
up in a transmitting circuit, the leads or conducting wires
connecting the various units should all be of as nearly the
same length as it is possible to have them.

The resistance of metallic conductors to high frequency
currents is several times their normal resistance to constant
currents. The larger the diameter of the wire the greater
is this ratio. This increase of resistance is due to the fact
that the high frequency currents permeate wires only a very
short distance. In the case of copper, the depth is only
about one three-hundredth of an inch and with other metals
much less. Therefore it is advisable to use as leads and
conductors of large condensers, stranded wires or flat
ribbons of sheet copper in order to present more surface and
offer less resistance than solid conductors of an equal cross
sectional area.

Iron must never be used, as its resistance to these currents
is over fifty times that of copper.

After connections are once established between the jars
or the condenser units, they cannot be altered nor the
capacity changed without re tuning the circuits afterwards.

CHAPTER VIII. SPARK GAPS OR OSCILLATORS.

The oscillator or spark gap is one of the most important
yet often the most poorly adjusted part of a wireless
station.

To obtain a good oscillatory discharge with little damping
it is necessary that the resistance of the circuit should be
kept low, and since the greatest part of the resistance is in
the spark gap it would appear as if this must be very short.
While there are reasons for keeping it short there are on the
other hand very good reasons why it should not be made too
short, and the proper length should be a sort of compromise
to be determined by experiment.

If the gap is too short, the discharge will form an arc and
the only oscillations taking place will be those corresponding
to the frequency of the charging current. Power
consumption is also in favor of a long gap, since it causes the
induction coil or transformer to draw less current from the line.
Another argument in favor of a long gap is the fact that
the condenser is charged to a higher voltage and more
energy stored up, which makes a greater distance of
transmission possible. But as stated above (and there always is
a tendency for the amateur operator to open out his gap as
long as the sparks will continue to jump steadily) the
discharge will not oscillate but will merely set up a
unidirectional current.

There exists a proper gap length for a given circuit which
will cause that circuit to emit a maximum amount of energy
and which may be determined accurately only by means of
a hot-wire ammeter placed in the aerial circuit. The proper
gap length is then indicated by the maximum deflection of
the meter.

The correct adjustment of the gap may be approximated
by the experienced operator. If too short, the spark will be
hissing and flaming and is in extreme cases red or yellow
colored. It should be lengthened out until it is thick and
white and a slight increase in sound is noted. The spark
should not be, as commonly thought, stringy and crackling.

Arcing is often caused by insufficient condenser capacity
in the circuit. But if the capacity is increased to remedy the
arcing, the gap length should also be increased or otherwise
the potential of the condenser may not be sufficiently raised
to permit a disruptive discharge to take place.

Fig. 59. Spark Gaps.

The best spark gap for use with a small untuned
transmitter, making use of neither tuning helix nor condenser, is
shown at the left in Fig. 59. It consists of two brass balls
supported on suitable double binding posts. The balls tend
to thicken the spark and make it more disruptive than if it
passed between rods or points. The balls also increase the
potential required to leap the gap without increasing its
length and permit the aerial to become more highly charged
before a discharge takes place. For this reason the balls or
knobs must always be kept free from small rough spots or
points by frequent polishing.

Silver has some peculiar property which makes it the
most efficient material for a spark gap, but its cost
prohibits its use and so brass or zinc, which are next in order,
is generally used.

The type of gap illustrated at the right in Fig. 59 is
very convenient and efficient for small tuned transmitters
employing coils of low power.

Fig. 60. Spark Gap.

The zinc tips are pieces of 3/8-inch zinc battery rod 3/4 inch
long. They are bored and threaded to fit a pair of brass
rods 1/8 inch diameter and 2 1/2 inches long. The rods are
supported by two double binding posts and are fitted with two
pieces of hard rubber rod 1/2 inch diameter and 1 inch long to
serve as handles. If desirable one of the rods and binding
posts may be threaded so that the adjustment of the gap
can be accomplished by revolving the handle and screwing
the gap in or out.

A gap of the size and type just described would not be
suitable in connection with a large transformer or an
induction coil. The heavy discharge of such powerful
instruments would very rapidly heat the small brass parts and
corrode or even melt the zinc. The spark gap such as is
shown in Fig. 59 may be used with a very large coil or the
two kilowatt transformer if the same proportions are kept
and it is made one-half again as large. Using the
dimensions shown in the figure, the spark gap is suited to either
the open core or the 1/4 and 1/2 kilowatt transformers.

Two pieces of hard rubber rod, 3/4 inch diameter and 2
inches long serve as the standards. Three grooves 1/8 inch
wide, 1/8 inch deep and 1/8 inch apart better the appearance
and reduce the liability of leakage but are not necessary.
Two holes 2 inches apart are bored in
S
, a strip of brass
3 x 3/4 x 1/4 inches. Two screws pass through these holes into
the rubber standards
BB
and hold
S
firmly in position.
The end of
S
is bent down at right angles and bored to
receive a binding post. A hole is bored in
S
halfway
between the standards and tapped to receive a threaded brass
rod 2 inches long and 1/4 inch diameter. The lower ends of
the hard rubber standards are each bored and tapped to
receive a screw which fastens them to the base. The
electrodes are zinc or brass cylinders 3/4 inch diameter and 5/8 inch
long. The upper electrode is adjustable by means of a
knurled hard rubber head 2 inches diameter and 1/2 inch thick.
The lower one is fastened to a brass plate 2 inches long,
1 inch wide and 1/8 inch thick. One end of the plate is fitted
with a binding post. The base is a piece of hard rubber
5 1/2 x 3 inches x 3/4 inch.

CHAPTER IX. TRANSMITTING HELIXES.

The transmitting helix or tuning coil supplies the greater
part of the inductance which is so necessary for the
production of electrical oscillations in the transmitting circuit.
It consists merely of a few turns of heavy copper or brass
wire wound in a helix around a form. Two or more
movable contacts permit various amounts of the
inductance to be inserted in the open or closed circuits.

The tuning helixes described in this chapter are offered
principally to serve as guides. They have been designed as
carefully as possible to suit the transmitters for which they
are recommended.

There are factors, such as the aerial, etc., which vary
greatly in stations of the same rated power and make it
best to determine the length of the helix by actual
experiment.

A certain amount of inductance is necessary in the closed
circuit for the production of electrical oscillations and to
transfer energy to the open circuit. Inductance beyond that
necessary to receive energy from the closed circuit lessens
the radiation and makes it necessary to increase the period
of the open circuit by adding wires to the aerial.

The open and closed circuits of a tuning helix constitute
an oscillation transformer, and the two circuits if they are
very close together or intertwined are said to be
closely
coupled
. When separated or far apart they are
loosely
coupled
.

Closely Coupled Helix.
—Fig. 61 illustrates a closely
coupled tuning helix, suitable for ordinary induction coils
giving sparks up to 3 or 4 inches in length.

The heads of the helix are circular pieces of hard wood
1 inch thick and 12 inches in diameter. Six rectangular
notches are made at equal distances along the edges of the
heads. Six uprights 3/4 x 1/2 inch and 8 3/4 inches long are
fastened in the notches with small round headed brass
screws so that the heads are separated a distance of 6 3/4
inches. Grooves are cut in the outside face of each of the
uprights at a distance of 7/8 inch apart. The wire forming
the helix is 1/4 inch brass. Brass wire is springy and retains
its shape better than copper. About twenty-two feet will
be required. The wire is wound in the grooves in the
uprights and held in place by a few double pointed tacks
placed judiciously. The adjacent turns of wire will then
have a separation of about 5/8 inch.

Fig. 61. Closely Coupled Helix.

The helix is raised above the level of the operating bench
or table by three small feet fastened to the under head, 120
degrees apart.

Plate III. Transmitting Circuits.

If it is desired to use this helix with the one quarter K.W.
transformer, the diameter of the wire should be increased to
5/16 inch. The two K.W. transformer will require seven
turns of 1/2-inch hard drawn brass wire two feet in diameter.

Fig. 62. Prague Transmitting Helix.

When setting up a transmitting
station, it is a good plan to coil
up a long piece of the wire to be
used on the helix around a rough
form. The adjacent turns should
be the same distance apart as
they are to be on the finished
instrument. Tune up the station
with this improvised helix and
ascertain the amount of
inductance required. It is then easy
to design a helix containing the
proper amount of wire. Four or
five feet extra should be
included to allow plenty of range in case it is ever necessary
to make any changes in the aerial or condenser.

Fig. 63. Closely Coupled Tuning Circuit.

Plate III illustrates the transmitting circuits of the
various commercial systems. The circuit used will determine
the number of binding posts and movable clips necessary.
Fig. 63 gives the diagram of a very good circuit.

Loosely Coupled Helix
. The heads of the primary
coil of the loosely coupled helix illustrated in Fig. 64 are
circular pieces of hard wood 1 inch thick and 18 inches in
diameter. Six uprights 3/4 x 1/2 inch and 11 inches long are
set into notches in the upper head and fastened to the base
so that the space between the heads for winding the wire is
10 inches.

Fig. 64. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Helix and Contact Clip.

A square wooden pillar 1 1/2 x 1 1/2 inches and 32 inches
long passes through a square hole 1 1/2 x 1 1/2 inches in the
center of the heads and projects 20 inches above the upper
one. The heads of the secondary coil are each 12 inches
in diameter. The distance between them is also 12 inches.
A square hole 1 1/2 inches x 1 1/2 inches in the center of each of
the heads permits the whole secondary coil to slide up and
down on the pillar. Several 1/4 inch holes bored 1 inch apart
in the pillar admit a small peg of the same diameter. The
coupling between the two coils is varied by changing the
height of
S
above
P
and inserting the peg to hold the
upper coil in position.

The primary winding of the transformer should consist of
about 20 turns 15 inches in diameter, and may range in size
of wire from No. 2 to No. 8 B. S. gauge.

The secondary is 10 inches in diameter and will require
about 40 turns of No. 10 to No. 16 B. S. gauge.

The largest sizes of wire are for the one-quarter and
one-half K.W. transformers while the smaller sizes are best
suited to small induction coils.

Fig. 64 also illustrates a clip for making connections to
the turns of the helix. The handle is a piece of hard rubber
rod 2 1/2 inches long and 5/8 inch in diameter. A saw slot 1 inch
deep is cut down the center of one end. Two strips of spring
brass 2 inches long, 5/8 inch wide and 3/64 inch thick are bent
as shown in the illustration. The straight ends are slipped
in the slot in the handle and clamped together by boring
a hole and passing a machine screw through. The upper
end may be fitted with a nut or a binding post to
facilitate connection. Flexible copper ribbons or stranded wire
should be the only conductor used for the tuning leads.

Fig. 65. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Circuit.

Tuning a Transmitter.
—Fig. 62 shows a complete
wiring diagram of a transmitter with a hot wire ammeter
inserted in the aerial circuit.

To tune such a transmitter place both contacts
A
and
B

together on a turn of wire near the center of the helix. Set
the transmitter in operation by pressing the key and move
both contacts together along the various turns of wire until
the meter shows a maximum reading. Then vary
B
alone
until the reading is still higher. Shifting
A
varies the
inductance in the closed circuit and
B
that of the open circuit.

Fig. 65 illustrates the circuit of a loosely coupled
transmitter. To tune such a circuit it is necessary to connect a
small needle spark gap between the aerial and the ground.

Fig. 66. United Wireless Helix, Spark Gap and Condenser.

A suitable spark gap for
this purpose may be made
of two darning needles
mounted in double binding
posts.

Set the clips,
A
and
B
, at
the center turns of their
respective coils. Press the
key to operate the
transmitter and adjust the clip,

A
, until the best spark is
obtained in the small
needle gap. Then adjust

B
until the spark is still
better.

If several wires seem to
give the same results, move
the secondary a little
further away from the primary and try again. After securing
the best spark it is possible to obtain, remove the needle
gap, which is only used in testing. The hot wire ammeter
should then be placed in series with the aerial. By slowly
and carefully adjusting the clips and varying the coupling,
the hot wire ammeter will indicate the proper "tune."

The secondary of the loosely coupled tuning coil produces
a "kick back" effect on the primary, due to induction, and
unless the two coils are somewhat separated, the wave
emitted from the transmitter will have more than one "hump"
and a person receiving the wave will be able to tune it in
on two places on his tuning coil.

A loosely coupled tuning coil does not radiate so much
energy as a closely coupled helix, but will, when properly
tuned, emit a wave which is not so highly damped.
Therefore as far as distance is concerned the loosely coupled type
is perhaps the most efficient.

CHAPTER X. KEYS.

THE keys used in wireless work differ from those used
in commercial wire telegraphy in being much heavier and
stronger, so as to conduct and break the heavier
currents without heating. Where very powerful currents must
be broken the contacts of the key usually operate under oil
or in the magnetic field of a pair of electromagnets. In
other cases a small key is used to operate a heavy relay.
In the former type a metal arm projects downward from
the lever of an ordinary Morse telegraph key into a
compartment filled with oil. The arm is provided with a
platinum point which makes contact with another similar point
on the bottom of the compartment, so that the break is
made under oil and the key remains cool and does not arc.
In the second form the same result is accomplished by a
magnetic "blowout." The "blowout" is merely an
electromagnet connected in series with the key and its poles at
right angles to the contacts of the key. When the circuit
is broken the magnetic field extinguishes the arc which tends
to form between the contacts of the key.

An ordinary Morse key may be used with coils operated
on batteries if they do not give more than a four-inch spark.
Larger coils or transformers, especially if they are operated
on the 110-volt current, require a heavier key. Where an
ordinary Morse key is used with a 3-inch or 4-inch coil it
is a very good plan to provide an auxiliary conductor, one
end of which is fastened to the metal base and the other
end to the adjusting screw on the back of the lever. A
piece of flexible lamp cord is suitable for this purpose.
This precaution saves the pivots of the key from heating
and possible burning by heavy currents.

Fig. 67. Morse Key fitted with Extension Lever.

The most convenient method is to fit up an old Morse
key in the manner shown in Fig. 67. The lever is extended
by a piece of aluminum or brass 6 inches long and 5/16 inch
thick. The exact shape and the dimensions are indicated
in the illustration.

The extension lever is provided with a 1/2-inch round brass
or nickel steel contact 7/8 inch long. The lower end of the
contact is bored and tapped to receive a short machine
screw. The other contact is a similar piece projecting
downwards from a small arm fastened to the top of a
standard 1/2 inch diameter and 2 inches long. The arm is a strip
of brass 1/2 inch wide, 1/4 inch thick, and 1 1/2 inches long,
fastened to the top of the standard with a machine screw.
The brass standard is held in an upright position by means
of a small machine screw which passes through the base.
A wire connects with this screw to a heavy binding post
mounted on the base. Connection is made with contact
on the extension lever by means of a piece of heavy flexible
lamp cord, which also runs to a binding post mounted on
the base. The contact is insulated from the extension lever
by means of two mica insulating washers and a bushing.
Avoid running the connection to the base of the key so that
the current must pass through the bearings. The contacts
should be filed until they are perfectly flat and square across
and make contact over their entire surface. When
carefully constructed a key of this type will carry without
heating almost any currents in reach of the amateur operator
and which his induction coil or transformer will stand.

Fig. 68. Wireless Key.

The plans and dimensions for a heavier key are shown in
Fig. 68. A wooden pattern of the base and bearings is
made and taken to a brass foundry where a casting in brass
may be secured. The pattern should be of the same shape
and size as the finished article represented in the figure.
It is given a slight taper so that it may be easily withdrawn
from the sand mold. The brass casting is finished up square
and smooth by grinding on an emery wheel or by careful
filing. The lever is a piece of brass rod 1/2 inch square and
6 1/2 inches long. One end is fitted with an ordinary hard
rubber Morse key knob. The knurled nuts and
thumbscrews are of the same size as those used on an ordinary
key, and may be purchased from an electrical supply house.

Fig. 69. "United Wireless Type Key."

The pivot is a piece of 3/16 inch round steel 1 inch long, and
passes through the lever 1 1/2 inches from the rear end. The
ends are ground or turned to sharp points and rest in
bearings formed by boring a recess in the ends of the
thumbscrews. The thumbscrews pass through the center of the
bearing, standards 3/4 inch above the base. The lever is
clamped to the center of the pivot by means of a small
machine screw. A heavy piece of spring brass,
S
, 1/2 inch
wide and 3 inches long, is fastened to the base at one end
with a short 8-32 screw. The other end is bent upward so
that it presses hard against the lower end of an adjusting
screw, which passes through the lever 1 1/4 inches forward of
the pivot. This spring serves as an auxiliary conductor
and saves the key from carrying an excessive current
through its bearings. By adjusting the thumbscrew, the
tension of the key may be regulated to suit the operator.
The contacts of the key are 1/8-inch round nickel steel alloy
or pure silver, set in short 1/4-inch machine screws which
fit into correspondingly threaded holes in the base and
the lever. This makes the contacts easily removable for
renewal. The lower contact is set in a longer screw than
the upper one so that connection may be made to it. It
is insulated from the base by a hard rubber brushing.

The contacts must be directly above one another and
in perfect alignment or else they will pit and stick.

CHAPTER XI. AERIAL SWITCHES AND ANCHOR GAPS.

Some form of switch for quickly connecting the aerial
and ground to either the transmitting or receiving
apparatus is necessary.

Low powered stations using an induction coil as a
transmitter will find a 250-volt double pole, double throw
porcelain base switch to be suitable. Such a switch is
connected up according to the diagram shown in Fig. 70. As
clearly illustrated, the receiving apparatus is in use when
the switch is thrown to the right, and the transmitter is ready
for operation when the switch is in the left-hand position.
The ease and speed with which such a switch may be thrown
from right to left or vice versa may be much facilitated by
fitting it with a larger and longer handle than the one
usually provided.

Fig. 70. Connections for Aerial Switch.

An ordinary double pole, double throw switch should be
mounted on the wall within easy reach of the operator,
while the two types of switch about to be described are
best situated directly on the operating table alongside of the
transmitting key.

All insulated parts of an aerial switch such as the base,
insulating bar, handle, etc., should be made of some good
insulating material, as porcelain, hard rubber or ebonite.
All insulation which is used in power switches such as slate,
wood, marble, etc., is worthless and should not be used.

If a loop aerial system is used, a switch is necessary, which
will break the primary transmitting current so that in case
of an accidental touch of the key while receiving, the high
voltage discharge will not pass across the anchor gap into the
receptor and badly damage the same or shock the operator.
The connections of such a switch and the loop aerial are
shown in the wiring diagram of the De Forest system.

Fig. 71. Aerial Switches.

A switch may be easily constructed from a 50 ampere,
single throw, triple pole, fuseless power switch. If it is
mounted on a slate base remove it and set it up on a base
of the same size made of fiber or porcelain. Flat unglazed
tiles of various sizes are obtainable from tile setters at a
very low cost. They may be easily bored with an ordinary
steel twist drill. Such tiles are excellent insulators when
not exposed to moisture and are useful for bases, etc., in
many cases. A heavy coat of shellac varnish will make
the tile impervious to moisture.

A hard rubber rod,
S
, 3 inches long and 5/8 inch diameter,
is mounted on both sides of the base in alignment with the
contacts. A strip of hard rubber,
Y
, 1 inch wide, 1/2 inch
thick and 6 1/2 inches long is fitted with two contacts similar
to those mounted on the base of the switch. The contacts
are mounted at a distance apart equal to the distance
between the outside knife blades of the switch. A 1/8-inch hole
is bored through the strip at both ends, through the axis
of the rods along their entire length and through the base.
A piece of brass rod 4 inches long and threaded at both
ends with an 8-32 die is passed through the holes and yoke,
so that the rods may be held firmly to the base and the
strip to the tops of the rods by two nuts screwed on the
ends of the brass rod.

Fig. 72. Detail of Contacts.

The upper contacts should be directly over the two
outside lower ones. They are made from a strip of brass 1/2 inch
wide, 3 1/2 inches long and 1/16 inch thick (bent as in Fig. 72).
A binding post is mounted on the yoke directly above and
connecting with each one of the contacts.

The middle pole of the switch is connected to the primary
of the coil or transformer, so that when the switch is down,
the primary circuit is completed, and when it is up it is
broken.

Fig. 73. Details of Switch Parts.

Some may prefer to make the complete switch, and in
that case the dimensions given in Fig. 73 may be of aid.
The knife blades are 6 inches long, 5/8 inch wide and 1/8 inch
thick. Three are required. A 1/8-inch hole is bored 3/8 inch
from one end, and the other end is cut out in the shape
shown in the illustration. An insulating bar 5 x 3/4 x 5/8
inches is made of hard rubber and three notches are cut in
the back face, one directly in the center and one 2 inches
on either side.

Fig. 74. Method of Fastening Knife.

Three 1/8-inch holes are bored one in the center of each
groove and at right angles to it. An 8-32 machine screw
3/4 inch long is placed in the notch in the end of the knife
blade and the screw passed through the hole in the
insulating bar. The blade may then be clamped tightly in place
by putting a nut on the end of the screw. The screw
which holds the middle knife blade in place is longer than
the other two so that a handle may be fitted on.

The bearings are made the same size and shape as the
contacts illustrated in Fig. 72, with the exception that a
1/8-inch hole is bored through near the top so that a small
bolt may be slipped in to hold the knife blades in place.

The base of the switch measures 8 x 9 x 3/4 inches. The
parts are assembled as in Fig. 71.

Another type of aerial switch called a "T" switch is
illustrated in the same figure. A piece of 3/4-inch hard rubber
is sawed in the shape of a T, 3 1/2 inches high and 6 1/2 inches
wide at the top. The upper contacts are mounted on arms
of the "T" and connected to binding posts placed
immediately above them, A slot, 1/2 inch wide and 3 inches long,
sawed in the center of the leg of the T, permits the middle
knife blade to move without obstruction.

Fig. 75. "T" Aerial Switch.

A double pole, double throw switch may be easily
adapted to form a "T" switch. Two knives are cut from sheet
brass, of the same shape as those already on the switch but
twice as long. The contacts at one end of the porcelain
base are removed and the bearings of the knife blade
fastened there in their stead. This forms a single throw,
double pole switch having knife blades twice the length of
the original double pole, double throw switch. A "T"
shaped support for the upper contacts may be sawed out
of 1/2-inch hard rubber and smoothed up with a file. The
support is fastened upright by means of two screws which
pass through holes in the center of the base where the
knife bearings originally were. The two contacts which
were removed from the base are fastened to the support
directly over the knife blades so that they make a good
contact when the switch is up. Two binding posts mounted
above the contacts make connection with them.

If desirable the switch may be fitted with a third knife
blade and contact so that when the switch is up in position
for receiving, the primary circuit of the induction coil or
small transformer is open.

It is obvious that the dimensions, etc., need not be the
same as those given here but may be adapted to suit the size
and design of the switch which is to be altered. The knives
should always be as long as convenient and the contacts
separated by a wide space.

Fig. 76. "United" Wireless Lightning Switch.

Fig. 77. Shoemaker Tuning Coil and Aerial Switch.

Figs. 76 and 77 illustrate the aerial switches used in the
installations of the United Wireless Telegraph Company.
These illustrations give a good idea of the long knife blades
employed. The lightning switch is fitted with a
micrometer spark gap on top of the switch which is in service
when the handle is up. The small spark gap affords a path
for the lightning to jump into the ground, but cannot be
bridged by the receiving currents.

Anchor Gaps.
—When a loop aerial system is employed
for both transmitting and receiving, a device known as an
anchor gap becomes necessary.

Fig. 78. "United" Wireless Anchor Gaps.

The construction and connection of a simple anchor gap
are shown in Fig. 79. A ring 1 3/4 inches outside and 1 1/4 inches
inside is cut out of 5/8-inch hard rubber or fiber and smoothed
up. Three 1/8-inch holes are bored in the periphery of the
ring at 120 degrees to each other. The holes are threaded
with a 10-24 tap. Three small binding posts are each
fitted with a 3/16-inch brass rod 7/8 inch long, having a 10-24
thread so that they may be screwed into the holes in the
ring.

Fig. 79. Anchor Gap.

The gap between the ends of the two rods connected to
the aerial and the receiving apparatus is adjusted until it
is about 1/8 inch long. The third point is screwed in until
it all but touches the other two.

CHAPTER XII. HOT WIRE AMMETER.

When a current passes through a conductor, it generates
heat in proportion to the resistance offered and the amount
of current flowing. Heat causes metals to expand
sufficiently so that these two properties may be applied to the
construction of a hot wire ammeter for the measurement
of alternating currents of high frequency and potential.

The hot wire ammeter is placed in series with the aerial,
so that by noting the deflection of the pointer, the
inductance, capacity and spark gap may be adjusted until the
meter gives a maximum reading.

Fig. 80. Simple Hot Wire Meter.

A simple and crude form of meter which is sufficiently
sensitive for most experimental work is illustrated in Fig.
80. A piece of No. 36 B. S. platinum wire is sealed in the
bulb of an ordinary air thermometer. When the wire
becomes heated by a passing current of electricity, it causes
the air in the bulb to expand and change the height of the
colored liquid in the tube.

An air-thermometer is simply a glass tube of fine bore
having a bulb blown at the upper end and the free end
immersed in a reservoir of ink or some other colored liquid.
The instrument is put in working order by grasping the
bulb in the palm of the hand, so that the warmth of the
hand will expand the air and cause some of it to escape
from the lower end of the tube. Upon removing the hand,
the air will contract and suck some of the liquid up into the
tube. It should rise only about half way to the bulb, and
the tube should be about 18 inches long so as to leave room
for changes in the position of the column due to variations
in the outside atmosphere. A cardboard scale graduated in
inches and reading downward is fastened in back of the
tube.

The tube should have a fine bore so as to make the
instrument as sensitive as possible. The best liquid to use is
alcohol, colored with a little aniline dye. Alcohol has a
lower specific gravity than water, and the column will be
more sensitive to small changes of pressure. The same
figure shows a form of meter devised and used with success
by the author.

Two tubes are fitted to the bulb, a large one having a
bore of about 0.1 of an inch and another about 0.04 inch.
Connection is established by the aid of two corks and a
short length of glass tubing one inch in diameter. The
tubes are bent U shaped, and a little colored alcohol is placed
in each, so that the bottle reservoir is unnecessary. The
tube of large bore is fitted at the top with an ordinary glass
stopcock such as that used in chemical laboratories.

The stopcock is left open and the transmitter is set in
operation by holding down the key. The helix, etc., are adjusted
until the larger tube shows a maximum reading. The
stop-cock is then closed and the instruments further adjusted by
noting the reading in the finer tube which corresponds to
much smaller changes in current. The finer bore cannot at
first be used alone because the large changes of current
would blow the liquid out of the tube. In lieu of a glass
stopcock, a piece of rubber tubing may be placed over the
end of the tube and closed, when necessary, with a pinch
cock.

Fig. 81. Meter with Case Removed.

Fig. 81 shows a more elaborate and sensitive form of
meter which is not only suitable for experimental outfits but
may be used with good results for more careful work. The
advantage of the form of meter here described is that it is
"pivotless" so to speak, and contains no bearings which
require jewels to eliminate friction.

The "hot wire" is platinum, and in order to compensate
for external changes of the atmospheric temperature, is
mounted on a strip of glass. Glass and platinum expand at
nearly the same rate, and the wire is thus kept taut and
prevented from changing the position of the pointer except
when the current passes.

Fig. 82. Glass Compensating Strip.

Drill four 1/8-inch holes in a piece of window glass 6 inches
long and 1 inch wide. The location of the holes is shown in
Fig. 82. The two at the ends serve to mount the standards,

A
and
B
, and those at the center to fasten down the strip
to the base. The holes are drilled with a small
three-cornered file which has been broken off and set in a breast drill.
The broken end should be used to drill the glass and be
kept thoroughly lubricated with camphor and turpentine.
With a little care and patience the holes may be drilled
without breaking the glass.

Fig. 83. Details of "Hot Wire" Supports.

Two brass standards are fastened on each end of the glass.
They are bent out of sheet brass and are 3/4 inch high and
3/8 inch wide. A brass spring of the same width and 1 1/4 inches
long is clamped under one standard. The standard which
holds the spring in position is tapped for a small
thumbscrew which may be secured from a binding post. Solder a
small brass pin to the top of the spring and another one to
the top of the standard which is fastened at the opposite
end of the glass strip. Some paper or rubber washers must
be placed between the feet of the standards and the glass
strip to prevent it from cracking when the screws are
tightened.

For a station up to one-half K.W. in power the hot wire
must be No. 40 B. S. gauge platinum. For larger stations
a single No. 36 wire may be used or three No. 40 wires in
parallel. The wire must be about 7 inches long. Stretch
it between the standard,
A
, and the spring,
C
. Wrap the
ends around the pins and solder them there, using as small
amount of solder as possible. The tension of the wire, which
should be taut, is adjusted with the thumbscrew.

Take a piece of the platinum wire about 1/2 inch long and
make a little eyelet at one end. Wrap the straight end
around the center of the long hot wire and tie a piece of
silk in the eyelet.

Fig. 84. Details of Movement.

The glass strip and its standards supporting the hot wire
may then be fastened to the baseboard of the instrument by
means of two round headed brass wood screws. Two rubber
washers must be interposed between the glass and the wood.
A piece of 3/32 inch brass 1/2 inch wide and 3 1/4 inches long is
bent in the shape shown by
F
in Fig. 84. The upper end is
bored and tapped to receive a thumbscrew similar to the
one in the standard on the glass strip. Two brass springs
1/64 inch thick, 3/8 inch wide and 1 1/4 inches long are soldered or
riveted at opposite ends of
F
in the positions shown in Fig.
85. The springs should project one inch from the upright.
A small hook made from an ordinary pin is soldered to the
outside end of each.

Fig. 85. Complete Movement.

The movement is shown in perspective by Fig. 85.
G
is
a rectangle of very thin copper, 1/2 inch long and 1/4 inch wide,
having a little projection 1/4 inch long bent in a curve so that
it forms a sextant of a circle, of which the intersection of the
diagonals of
G
would be the center.

The pointer is a piece of steel wire 5 inches long. It is
slightly flattened by hammering so that it will retain its
shape and not curl. About 1/2 inch is allowed to project
through
G
and is weighted with a lead shot so as to partly
counterbalance its weight.

Two loops of wire are fastened to the corners of
G
by
tying them in holes which are bored there for that purpose.
The wire is fine phosphor bronze .003-.005 of an inch in
diameter, which is used for suspending the movements of
delicate galvanometers. Pass the loops over the hooks on
the springs and adjust until the pointer moves horizontally.
Then fasten the wires permanently to the hooks by means
of a small drop of solder.

Fig. 86. Side View of Hot Wire and Movement.

The movement is mounted in the position shown by Fig.
86. The silk thread tied to the eyelet runs to the little
sextant and is cemented at the further end by means of a
small drop of sealing wax. The scale is a piece of sheet
copper or brass, covered with white paper and calibrated in
degrees or made to read in amperes by connecting it in
series with an ammeter and a source of direct current. A
rheostat should be included in the circuit and the current
varied so that various values may be marked off. All the
different points must be located by sending an actual
current of that value through the meter. An error is liable to
result if any of the points are marked by guesswork, for the
divisions grow smaller and smaller as they become farther
away from zero. For example a position of the pointer
corresponding to 0.1 of an ampere will not be half way between
zero and 0.2 but will be nearer the 0.2 division.

The resistance of wires to high frequency currents is much
higher than their resistance to constant currents. This
would seem at first to indicate that our meter will give a
higher reading for an equal current value, when used with
a high frequency current after being calibrated with a direct
current. But with wires of very small diameter such as No.
40 B. S. gauge there is almost no perceptible difference and
consequently no error unless the frequency of the
oscillations exceeds 1,000,000 per second, which is very unlikely
with the "spark" method of wireless telegraphy.

Fig. 87 illustrates the form of hot wire ammeter used by
the United Wireless Telegraph Co. for tuning their
installations.

Fig. 87. United Wireless Hot Wire Ammeter.

The pivotless meter just described should be fitted with
heavy binding posts which are connected to the brass
standards mounted on the glass strip by means of stranded
copper wire.

The meter should be fitted with a case and glass cover to
exclude dust and prevent injury to the working parts. It
should be mounted in such a position that the weight of the
pointer is sufficient to keep the silk thread taut so that when
the wire expands the pointer which is normally at zero will
fall of its own weight. When the wire cools after the current
has ceased to flow, it will contract and draw the pointer up
again.

Platinum wire will give good results, but for more accurate
work an alloy known as platinoid is most suitable.

Detailed instructions for tuning the transmitting circuits
by means of a hot wire ammeter are given in the chapter on
Transmitting Helixes.

CHAPTER XIII. OSCILLATION DETECTORS.

"UNIVERSAL" DETECTOR.

The purpose and position of the detector in a wireless
telegraph system has already received some notice in
the first chapter, but its operation and adjustment are so
important that this chapter deserves the most careful
consideration. The receiving range of a station is not as
much dependent upon the aerial system as it is upon the
adjustment of the tuning circuits and the detector itself.

It is suggested that the amateur experimenter not confine
his work to receiving only with a single type of detector but
rather accustom himself to the different instruments.

During the past few years many wireless telegraph
detectors have been invented which lend themselves readily to
amateur construction. It is somewhat of a convenience to
have a "universal" detector which with a little
manipulation may be used as more than one type and thus save
unnecessary expense and much labor.

The "universal" detector shown in Fig. 88 has been so
designed as to present a good appearance and at the same
time be successfully operated as an electrolytic, tantalum,
peroxide of lead, silicon, carborundum or any of the crystal
type detectors.

Fig. 88. Universal Detector.

Fig. 89. Details of Universal Detector.

The standard,
R
, is a 3/4-inch hard rubber rod, 1 1/4 inches
long, with a 3/16 inch hole bored through its axis. A spring,

S
, is made after the plan shown in Fig. 86. It is 2 inches
long and 1/16 inch thick. A brass collar 1/8 inch thick and
3/8 inch diameter is soldered on the smaller end of the spring
in order to so reenforce it that it may be bored and threaded
with an 8-32 tap to receive a thumbscrew. The brass
standard,
D
, is a small cylinder 3/8 inch high and 1/2 inch in diameter.
A 3/16 inch hole is bored through its axis. The arm,
A
, is brass
and measures 1 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/4 inches. The ends are rounded
by filing or grinding so that they coincide with the
semi-circumference of a circle having a diameter of 1/2 inch. Two
holes are bored on the center line 1/4 inch from each end.

One is a 1/8-inch hole and the other is threaded with a 10-32
tap to fit the large adjusting screw. The adjusting screw,

H
, is 1 1/4 inches long and has a 10-32 thread. A hard rubber
head 1 inch thick and 1 1/4 inches in diameter is clamped to
the upper end by means of two hexagonal brass nuts. A
small brass washer should be placed between the head and
each of the nuts to give it a more finished appearance and
prevent the nuts from marring the rubber.

Fig. 90. Parts of Universal Detector.

The brass bed plate,
B
, is 1/8 inch thick, 3 inches long and
2 inches wide. Two holes are drilled on the center line 9/16
inch and 7/8 inch from either end. One is 3/8 inch in diameter
and the other is threaded with an 8-32 tap. An insulating
bushing in the shape of a hard rubber washer on the lower
end of
R
, 1/8 inch thick and 3/8 inch in diameter, has a 3/16-inch
hole bored in its center and is fitted in the larger hole in the
bedplate. The whole detector is assembled and mounted
on a hard rubber base 4 x 5 x 4 inches. A brass binding
rod,
M
, 3 1/4 inches long and having an 8-32 thread, is passed
successively through the arm, the brass standard, the spring,
the hard rubber standard and the bedplate. A hexagonal
brass nut on the under side of the base and a thumb nut
on the brass arm serves to bind the whole tightly together.
Four binding posts are mounted on the four corners of the
base. Two are connected to the brass binding rod and two
to the bedplate. This completes the universal part of the
detector. The remaining parts are each described under the
headings of the respective detectors to which they belong.

ELECTROLYTIC DETECTORS.

"Bare Point" Type.
—Although the electrolytic is the
oldest of a long line of very sensitive detectors,
3
it still
holds first rank when in the hands of an experienced and
skillful operator. It exists in two different forms, but the
more favored is that known as the Fessenden "bare point"
type, which consists of a very fine Woolaston platinum wire
(.001-.00002 of an inch in diameter) dipping in a small cup
of dilute acid. The acid is either 20 per cent chemically
pure nitric or sulphuric.

Fig. 91. Bare Point Electrolytic Detector.

A large electrode of platinum wire or foil dips into or is
sealed in the bottom of the cup so as to make an electrical
connection with the liquid. The fine Woolaston wire is
clamped over the cup in a holder which permits of vertical
adjustment, by means of a thumbscrew, so that the depth
of immersion in the acid may be regulated.

Fig. 92. Effect of Exposing too much Wire.

Woolaston wire is covered with a comparatively thick
coating of silver, which before using must be removed from
the end for about 1/32 inch by dipping it in strong nitric acid,
which will dissolve the silver and expose the almost invisible
platinum core. Too much of the fine platinum core must
not be exposed or else the surface tension of the acid will
cause the wire to curl over and present a large flat surface
instead of a fine point. This is a very necessary and
important precaution, for the detector is more sensitive as
the area of contact between the fine wire and the liquid is
smaller.

Whenever this condition is reached the end of the wire
should be cut off with a pair of sharp scissors and a new
point exposed.

Fig. 93. Electrolytic Detector Circuits.

The detector circuit is shown in Fig. 93. The fine "bare
point" is always made the positive or anode of the battery
circuit. Otherwise the detector will not operate. A
potentiometer must be shunted across the terminals of the battery
to reduce the voltage to a value just below that which is
required to break down the thin film of oxygen gas which
collects on the "bare point" and polarizes it or insulates
it from the liquid so that little or no battery current can
flow. This film of gas is caused by the electrolysis of the
acid solution and the decomposition of the water into
hydrogen and oxygen gas.

When oscillations are set up in the receiving aerial and
they surge through the detector, a sufficient e.m.f. is
generated to break down the film of gas and permit the battery
current to flow again. The passage of current causes the
signals in the telephone receivers.

The electrolytic cup for the universal detector is
illustrated in Fig. 90. It is made of a piece of hard rubber rod
3/4 inch in diameter and 3/4 inch high. A recess 1/2 inch in
diameter and 3/8 inch deep is cut in the top to contain the acid.
A small hole 1/4 inch deep is bored in the under side and
threaded with an 8-32 tap. A brass pin 1/2 inch long,
having a corresponding thread, is fitted in the hole. The
pin may then be screwed into the small hole in the
bedplate. A piece of No. 30 B. S. gauge platinum wire or a
strip of platinum foil is clamped between the bottom of
the cup and the bedplate and then bent over the top of the
cup into the liquid.

Fig. 94. Electrolytic Detector.

A 1/16-inch hole 1/4 inch deep is bored in the lower end of a
thumbscrew having an 8-32 thread. A piece of Woolaston
wire 1/2 inch long is placed in the center of the hole and
tinfoil packed into the surrounding space with the head of a
sewing needle until the wire is held firmly in position. The
free end of the wire must then be dipped in some strong
nitric acid to remove the silver. The thumbscrew is placed
in the collar on the end of the spring of the universal
detector and lowered until the "bare point" almost touches the
surface of the electrolyte in the cup beneath. Pressure
must then be applied to the spring by turning the large
adjusting screw until the "bare point" touches the liquid
and a click is heard in the telephone receivers and a faint
bubbling sound is also audible. The adjusting screw must
then be slowly and carefully turned in the opposite
direction so as to raise the point until the bubbling changes to a
hissing sound. The point is then above the level of the
electrolyte in the cup but is still in contact with it because
of the capillary action of the fine wire and the liquid.

By using the large adjusting screw as much as possible,
instead of the small thumbscrew, the point is raised or
lowered without giving it a circular motion and much finer
adjustment is made possible. The potentiometer is
adjusted until the hissing noise caused by excessive battery
voltage just disappears. The detector is then in its most
sensitive condition for receiving signals.

When the detector is in use for long periods, the
potentiometer must be frequently readjusted to compensate the
gradual loss in voltage of the battery. It is well to provide
a small switch which will disconnect the battery from the
potentiometer when the detector is not in use. In the same
case the acid should be removed and placed in a tightly
stoppered bottle. A pipette or fountain pen filler furnishes
the most convenient means for filling or emptying the cup.
The acid must be kept perfectly pure and out of contact
with all metals other than platinum. Great care should
be exercised in filling the cup, for the acid, if spilled, will
not only badly corrode the metal fittings, but will also
provide a current leak and seriously weaken the signals.

Shoemaker and Stone Detectors.
—These two types of
detectors make use of "glass points," so called because the
fine platinum wire is sealed in a glass tube and the end of
the tube is then ground down on a fine oilstone until the
platinum wire is exposed. This results in a very fine
contact area and insures constant immersion of the point
without readjustment.

Fig. 95. Forming "Glass" Point.

The fine platinum wire for a glass point may be secured
from one of the flaming pocket cigar lighters making use of
spongy platinum. The center of a thick walled glass tube
is softened by heat and contracted as shown at
A-B
in
Fig. 95. After cooling, the tube is cut in half at the point
indicated by the dotted line. The platinum wire is placed
in the contracted end of the tube and carefully fused in so
that about one-half of the wire, which is about 1/2 inch long,
is embedded in the glass. The contracted end of the tube
containing the wire should be closed. Connection is
established to the upper end of the fine platinum wire by filling
the tube with mercury and dipping a piece of flexible
conductor in the mercury. The upper end of the tube is closed
and the mercury prevented from escaping by a small dab
of sealing wax.

The "point" is slowly and carefully rubbed on a fine
oilstone kept well wet with water. The tube must be held in
a vertical position so that the glass will be ground away at
right angles. When it is thought that the platinum wire
has been exposed by the grinding, connect the flexible
conductor to one pole of a battery. The other pole of the
battery is connected to a pair of sensitive telephone
receivers and the telephone receivers to a vessel containing
dilute acid. If the platinum wire is exposed, a sharp click
will be heard in the telephone receivers when the "point"
is dipped in the acid. Do not confuse the sharp click with
the sound which may be occasioned because the outside of
the glass tube is damp or wet.

After the point has been sufficiently ground, disconnect
the testing apparatus and connect the free end of the
flexible conductor to a binding post placed on the end of the
detector spring,
S
. The detector circuit is similar to that
of the "bare point" type.

Fig. 96. Shoemaker Detector.

The illustration shows what is sometimes called a
"primary cell" detector because it furnishes its own current and
does not require a battery. A Stone detector may be very
easily changed to one of the Shoemaker type by
substituting an amalgamated zinc rod for the platinum wire anode
which makes connection with the liquid in the cup. This
combination of platinum and zinc results in an
electromotive force of about 0.7 volt, and the telephone receivers
are connected directly to the terminals of the detector
without any local battery or potentiometer. The
electrolyte in the cup must be a 20 per cent solution of pure
sulphuric acid, as nitric acid would dissolve the zinc in a very
few minutes. The zinc must be kept well amalgamated
with mercury.

Fig. 97. Shoemaker Detector Circuits.

The Shoemaker system makes use of a loop aerial, and the
circuits with a single and double coil tuner are illustrated
in Fig. 97. It is not necessary to use these, and the detector
will operate just exactly as well on a "straightaway"
aerial.

Lamp Detector.
—All electrolytic detectors, more
especially those of the "glass point" type, are subject to the
annoyance of "burn-outs." That is, the fine platinum wire
melts when receiving strong signals from a near-by station.

In such case, the "bare point" must be lowered until it
again makes contact with the liquid, and the "glass point"
reground until the wire is again exposed.

When this trouble comes often it is very convenient to
have at hand a simple detector which will not burn out
and which may be substituted for the
usual one when great sensitiveness is not
required.

Fig. 98. Lamp Detector.

Such an instrument is made by
snipping off the tip of a small incandescent
electric lamp and removing the filament
with a wire. One of the leading-in
wires is broken off as close as possible to
the glass stub and the globe half filled
with a 20 per cent acid solution. The
broken wire must be made the negative or
cathode and connected like a Fessenden
or Stone detector. This lamp detector
though crude will give good service
without burning out when used to receive from near-by stations.

In place of a lamp detector, a glass point having a larger
wire than that of the cigar lighter may be used instead of
the usual point, but it will not be so sensitive.

Fig. 99 illustrates a simple form of electrolytic detector
which is not so sensitive as that shown in Fig. 100 but is
still very serviceable.

The cup is made from the carbon of an old dry cell, the
brass connecting cap serving very well to make the
connections to. It has a recess about 1/2 inch in diameter and
1/4 inch deep cut in the top to contain the electrolyte. The
cup should be about one inch high. A file will smooth up
any rough edges and give it a good appearance.

Fig. 99. Simple Electrolytic Detector.

The yoke is made of a piece of 1/8-inch sheet brass about
3/4 inch wide, bent in the shape shown in the illustration.
Two small holes are drilled in the feet, to serve to fasten
the yoke firmly to the base and also to make connection to.

The adjusting screw may be made from the screw taken
from the carbon of an old dry cell. To permit of accurate
adjustment, it should be fitted with a large head made from
a piece of 1/4-inch hard rubber or fiber cut in a circle about
1 1/4 inches in diameter. Bore a small hole about 1/8 inch in
diameter through the center of the head and force it on
the screw. A nut screwed on the under side will then
clamp it tightly against the brass head. A hole is bored
in the center of the yoke and a battery nut which will fit
the adjusting screw soldered directly under it.

The platinum wire may be either soldered to the
adjusting screw or fastened with tinfoil in the method which has
been described.

The cup and yoke are best mounted on a piece of hard
rubber 1/2 inch thick, 3 inches wide and 4 inches long. A
binding post is placed near each of the four corners.

It is possible to do extremely fine and long distance work
with the detector illustrated in Fig. 100. It is so arranged
that the "bare point" need not necessarily be revolved when
making an adjustment, and so it is possible to place it in a
very sensitive condition.

A brass standard,
U
, 1 1/4 inches long is cut from a piece
of 1/2-inch rod. A hole bored in the top and bottom of the
standard is threaded with an 8-32 tap. A brass rod,
R
,
2 inches long is threaded with an 8-32 die throughout its
entire length. One end is screwed in the top of
U
.

A piece of brass tubing,
P
, 1 1/4 inches long and having an
internal bore of 1/2 inch is slipped over
U
. A slot cut in
P

fits over a small pin set in
U
and permits
P
to be slid up and
down but not to turn around.

Fig. 100. Electrolytic Detector.

A head in the form of a circular brass washer,
E
, 1/8 inch
thick, 1/2 inch in diameter and having a 5/32-inch hole bored
in the center is soldered in the top of the tube,
P
.

A circular piece of hard rubber,
H
, 2 inches in diameter
and 1/2 inch thick is fitted with a brass bushing having a hole
in the center with an 8-32 thread to screw on the rod,
R
.

A spiral spring is placed around
R
between
U
and the
head
E
. A small brass washer should be placed between

H
and
E
in order to eliminate friction. When
H
is turned
in one direction, the spring will cause
P
to rise, and when
turned in the other direction it will be lowered.

A brass arm,
A
, 1/4 x 1/4 x 1 1/2 inches carries a small
thumbscrew,
r
, at one end, while the other end is soldered to
P

as shown in Fig. 96. The Woolaston wire is soldered to
T
.

Fig. 101. Details of Electrolytic Detector.

A small carbon cup 3/4 x 3/4 inch serves to hold the
electrolyte. A 3/8-inch hole is bored 1/4 inch deep in the bottom
of the cup and poured full of melted lead. The lead is then
bored and tapped to fit a machine screw which fastens the
cup to the base. Connection is made from a binding post
to the machine screw. A second binding post is connected
to the screw which fits into the bottom of
U
and holds
it to the base.

If desirable a circular piece of hard wood,
F
, may be
turned out and glued to the base around the cup in order
to give it a more finished appearance.

The thumbscrew,
T
, is used to lower the "bare point"
until it almost touches the liquid, and then the large head,

H
, is brought into play to make the finer adjustment.

Increasing the Sensitiveness of an Electrolytic Detector.

The sensitiveness of an electrolytic detector may be
increased in three ways, viz., by connecting two detectors
in series, by warming the electrolyte and by agitating it.

The first method is clearly apparent.

The second is accomplished by placing the detector over
a sand bath and gently warming it. It will then show a
marked increase in the strength of the signals at a
temperature of about 30 C. This increase will continue to
rise with the temperature until it reaches a maximum at
about 60 C.

Fig. 102. Increasing the Sensitiveness of an Electrolytic Detector.

Branly discovered that a fine stream of gas passed through
the electrolyte in order to agitate it increases the strength
of the signals in the phones. He devised a detector
provided with two extra platinum terminals sealed in the cup.
When connected in series with a battery and an adjustable
resistance, these terminals cause electrolysis of the water,
and a fine stream of oxygen and hydrogen gas flows through
the acid electrolyte. The stream of gas agitates the liquid
just sufficiently so that when oscillations strike the detector
they augment the breaking down of the film of gas which
collects on the fine platinum point. This results in an
increase in the battery current flowing through the telephone
receivers of from two to four times and a corresponding
increase in the volume of sound. The adjustable resistance
is used to regulate the decomposition of the electrolyte and
formation of gas, for if this proceeds too rapidly an
undesirable rumbling noise will be produced in the telephone
receivers.

TANTALUM DETECTOR.

The tantalum detector is especially suitable for the
amateur experimenter because its change in resistance when
struck by oscillations is so great that high resistance
telephone receivers are not necessary. Its normal resistance
is about 1000-2000 ohms, and this sometimes drops as low
as 125-100 ohms when struck by oscillations of ordinary
strength. It is not nearly so sensitive as the electrolytic
or crystal detectors, but gives very much louder tones
in the telephone receivers when used for short distance
work.

Fig. 103. Tantalum Detector.

The detector is easily made by substituting a piece of
tantalum wire for the Woolaston wire of an ordinary
electrolytic detector. The dilute acid solution is removed from the
cup and replaced by some pure mercury. The
connections remain the same as for the "bare point." The
potentiometer is adjusted until the potential of the battery is in
the neighborhood of 0.2-0.4 volt.

The tantalum wire may be easily secured by breaking the
globe of a tantalum lamp and using a piece of the filament.
It is best to snip off the lamp tip before breaking the globe.
This precaution admits the air and prevents an explosion
which would shatter the glass and scatter the filament in
fragments.

If the universal detector is used with a tantalum point,
turn the small thumbscrew until the wire almost touches
the surface of the mercury. Then lower it with the large
adjusting screw until the tantalum touches the surface and
a sharp click is heard in the telephone receivers. Adjust the
potentiometer until the signals are the loudest.

CRYSTAL DETECTORS.

Certain minerals and crystals, principally members of the
carbon and sulphur groups, possess the peculiar property of
rectifying electrical oscillations and converting them into a
pulsating direct current. These crystals conduct the current
better in one direction than in the other. In the case of a
current having a potential of ten volts and applied to the
ends of a carborundum crystal, the current may be one
hundred times greater when flowing in one direction than
when flowing in the other. This ratio decreases as the
voltage is raised, for with 25 volts it may be only about
forty times greater. The crystals when properly inserted
in the aerial circuit are enabled to rectify the oscillations
and produce sounds in the telephone receivers without the
aid of a battery.

The following is a partial list of the minerals and crystals
exhibiting these properties to a sufficient extent that they
are of value as oscillation detectors in wireless telegraphy.

In the case of iron pyrites the writer has found that a
specimen of this mineral containing very little or no copper
as an impurity does not exhibit these properties to an
appreciable extent.

Fig. 104. United Wireless Carborundum Detector (horizontal type).

In order to use the universal detector for minerals, a
special contact similar to that shown in Fig. 90 must be
made. The contact is bored and threaded on its under side
to fit a brass pin 3/4 inch long and having an 8-32 thread.
The other end of the pin screws into the hole in the
bedplate. The large knurled portion of the contact permits
it to be raised or lowered without the fingers coming in
contact with the crystal. The crystal is clamped between
the contact and the spring,
S
. The position is varied until
a sensitive spot is found and then the pressure is carefully
regulated by means of the large adjusting screw until the
signals in the telephone receivers are the loudest. If
possible avoid touching the crystals with the fingers, as the oil
and dirt, even though it cannot always be seen, spoils their
value for long distance work. Use instead a pair of steel
forceps.

Fig. 105. United Wireless Carborundum Detector (vertical type).

The United Wireless Telegraph Co. makes use of
carborundum in the detectors shown in Figs. 104 and 105. The
principal advantage of carborundum over such substances
as silicon, etc., is that it is not affected by the heavy discharge
of the transmitting apparatus and does not require a new
adjustment after each period of sending. All the crystals
will not work, and so a large cake should be purchased and
the desired crystals selected. The dark blue portions of the
mass, which are the hardest, will give the clearest tones in
the telephone receivers, and are preferable to the lighter
colored crystals. Since the crystals conduct better in one
direction than in the other, as explained above, the
adjustment must be made with the view of determining in which
position the particular crystal will work the best.

Carborundum will produce sounds in the telephone
receivers without the aid of any battery, but for careful work
a battery and a potentiometer are necessary.

The other crystals given in the column merely require that
the telephone receivers be connected to the detector
terminals as in the wiring diagram in Fig. 108.

The Clapp-Eastham detector makes use of a crystal of
iron pyrites held in a brass retaining cup beneath the metal
contact point. It is not affected by strong signals and
requires no battery or potentiometer. When adjusted it will
remain in a sensitive condition for a long time without
further attention.

Fig. 106. Clapp-Eastham Ferron Detector.

Silicon Detector.
—While the silicon and "perikon"
detectors are classed as mineral or crystal detectors they
deserve special attention.

Fig. 107. Silicon Crystal in Cup.

Silicon gives fair results if a crystal is placed between two
metal electrodes as, for instance, between the contact and
spring of the "universal" detector, but is much more
sensitive when properly mounted. A brass cup such as that
shown in Fig. 90 is made and the interior brightened by
scraping with a file. The cup is then poured full of a molten
fusible alloy and the silicon pressed in it until it cools and
becomes set. It should then present an appearance similar
to that shown by
A
in Fig. 107. The silicon is ground down
by rubbing on the surface of a clean oilstone kept well wet
with water, until the surface is flat and shows a polish.

Fig. 108. Silicon Detector Circuits.

The cup containing the silicon is placed over the hole in
the bedplate of the universal detector. A knurled brass
thumbscrew having a point on its lower end is screwed into
the collar on the spring,
S
, and brought to bear on the
polished surface of the silicon. The pressure may be easily
regulated by means of the large adjusting screw until the
signals in the telephone receivers are the loudest. It is not
advisable to fasten the cup to the bedplate but merely to
brighten the bottom so as to insure a good contact. The
cup may then be moved around so that different portions of
the polished surface of the silicon may be brought into play
when desirable.

If the knurled brass thumbscrew is fitted with a
platinum point which can be brought to bear on the surface of
the silicon, the efficiency of the detector will be materially
increased.

When mounting silicon or other crystals some careless
experimenters use lead or a metal having a high melting
point instead of a fusible alloy. This is poor policy because
the high temperature coats the surface of the crystals and
the interior of the cup with a non-conducting layer which
destroys the sensitiveness and makes it unfit for long
distance work. A fusible alloy melting at about the boiling
point of water or even lower should be used. Such alloys are
usually composed of tin, lead and bismuth. The addition
of a little cadmium serves to make the fusing point
considerably lower in each case. The alloys may be prepared
by the experimenter from the following formulae, or are
obtainable from a firm manufacturing fire plugs for
automatic fire extinguishers.

The lead should be melted first and then the bismuth,
tin and cadmium added in the order named.

Perikon Detector.
—The Perikon detector is one of the
latest types to come into extensive use. It consists of two
crystals, zincite and chalcopyrites,
4
set in cups in the
manner just described and placed in contact with each other.
The minerals are mounted similar to those in Fig. 105. The
zincite should present a rather flat surface with the grain of
the crystal parallel to the sides of the cup so that the top
surface corresponds to the end of a stick of wood sawed at
right angles to the grain. More than one crystal of zincite
is usually set in the same cup. The chalcopyrites should
present a rather blunt point. The cup containing the
chalcopyrites is the smaller and is bored and threaded to fit a
thumbscrew which passes through the collar in the spring,
S, of the "universal" detector. The bottom of the cup
containing the zincite is brightened so as to insure a good
contact and then placed on the bed plated under the cup
containing the chalcopyrites which is fastened to the
thumbscrew. The zincite may then be moved around until the
most sensitive portion is found. The chalcopyrites is
lowered until it comes into contact with the zincite and then
the pressure regulated by means of the large adjusting
screw.

Fig. 109. Perikon Detector Elements.

The Perikon detector gives excellent results without a
battery and is preferably used in that manner. If a battery
is used, a potentiometer to lower the voltage is necessary.

When adjusting this or the carborundum detector where
a battery is used, the pressure must be very carefully
regulated until it is found to be the best. When the pressure is
light the signals in the phones are due to an imperfect
contact, and when it is slightly increased the rectifying
properties of the crystal are brought into play.

The Perikon detector illustrated in Fig. 110 is somewhat
similar to that used for commercial work.

The standards or posts supporting the cups which
contain the elements are brass rods 1/2 inch square and 1 1/2 inches
high. A hole is bored in the bottom of each and threaded
with an 8-32 tap to receive a machine screw which passes
through the base and holds them in an upright position. A
hole is bored 1 1/8 inches from the bottom, in the face of one
standard and threaded with an 8-32 tap. A brass rod 1 1/4
inches long, carrying at one end a cup 1 inch in diameter
and 3/8 inch deep, is threaded to fit in the hole in the standard.
The zincite is mounted in this cup.

Fig. 110. Perikon Detector.

The other standard is cut in half with a hack saw and a
1/8-inch hole bored 1/4 inch deep in the axis of each piece. A
pin, 1/2 inch long, is set in the lower half by soldering it in the
hole. The upper half of the standard is placed over the pin
and left free to move when twisted. A 1/8-inch brass tube,
1 inch long, passes through the upper part of the standard.
A 1/8-inch brass rod, 1 3/4 inches long, passes through the tube.

The small cup containing the zincite is mounted on one
end of the rod and a hard rubber handle on the other.

A brass spring is placed between the cup and the standard
in order to press the chalcopyrites against the zincite. The
cup is mounted out of center so that by revolving it and
twisting the standard at the same time the chalcopyrites
may be brought into contact with any portion of the zincite.
By screwing the rod supporting the zincite cup in or out of
the standard the pressure with which the two elements are
pressed together may be regulated.

The base of the detector is hard rubber of the dimensions
indicated in the illustration. Four binding posts on each
corner of the base are necessary. The detector is connected
in a similar manner to the silicon detector shown in Fig.
108. If a battery is used the circuit should be like that of
the "bare point" electrolytic, and the current must flow
from the zincite to the chalcopyrites.

LEAD PEROXIDE DETECTOR.

The peroxide of lead detector makes use of no liquids, but
still may be classed as an electrolytic since its action is of
that nature.

Fig. 111. Peroxide of Lead Detector.

It consists of a pellet of lead peroxide held between an
electrode of lead and one of platinum. Contrary to most
other detectors, the resistance is increased upon the passage
of electrical oscillations. The oscillations stimulate
chemical action and increase a counter-electromotive force
sufficiently so that a decrease in the current sent through the
phones by the local battery takes place. The action may
be outlined more in detail as follows. The current of the
local battery decomposes part of the lead peroxide into its
components, lead and oxygen. The lead ions are
positively electrified and so they tend to pass upward toward
the lead electrode which is negative. The negative ions of
oxygen gas tend to pass downwards towards the platinum.
But the lead and platinum electrodes with the intervening
lead peroxide constitute a small cell acting independently
of the local battery and sending a current in the opposite
direction. This counter-electromotive force tends to send
the ions in an opposite direction to that in which they are
sent by the battery current. Upon the passage of electrical
oscillations this counter electromotive force is increased
and sufficient ions sent out in opposition to those of the
battery current so that an appreciable drop in the current
flowing through the telephone receivers takes place. The
sudden current drop produces a sound in the receivers.

The lead pellets may be secured from a druggist who can
mold them in his tablet press. They should be subjected
to as great a pressure as possible in order to reduce
resistance and prevent crumbling.

A piece of platinum foil about 1/2 inch square is placed
beneath the pellet on the crystal electrode. A piece of
clean, bright sheet lead 3/8 inch in diameter and 1/8 inch thick
is laid on the pellet and the whole clamped together by
tightening the thumbscrew passing through the collar on
the spring,
S
. The detector is connected up similar to
the "bare point," The platinum is made the positive of
the local battery. Adjustment is secured by regulating the
pressure.

It is very necessary that the pellets be kept dry, as
otherwise a loud singing and hissing noise, due to the
decomposition of the water, will render the reception of signals very
difficult.

THE MARCONI MAGNETIC DETECTOR.

When an oscillatory discharge takes place through a coil
of wire surrounding a needle, it magnetizes the needle in
a totally different manner from a voltaic current. The
needle will have several poles throughout its length, many
of them reversed. Rutherford applied this phenomenon to
the detection of electrical oscillations, but it remained for
Marconi to improve it and give the magnetic detector its
existing form. This type of detector is very sensitive, free
from all adjustment and is not made inoperative by the
heavier discharge of the transmitter during each period of
sending.

Fig. 112. Marconi Magnetic Detector.

A small transformer is provided with a core composed
of a band or cord of iron wires in the form of an endless
belt which passes around two pulleys kept in motion by
a clockwork motor. The band revolves in the field of a
strong horseshoe magnet and passes directly over the poles
after issuing from the transformer bobbin, so that the
portion approaching the bobbin are constantly in a state of
increasing magnetism. The actual operation is based upon
the property of iron called hysteresis, for the magnetism
of the core lags behind that of the permanent magnet and
is of a different degree from what it ought to be, in view of
its position in the vicinity of the permanent magnet. The
moment the oscillations pass through the primary coil of
the transformer, this lag is set free and the magnetism
assumes its full value. The change in magnetism induces
a current in the secondary, which registers as a sound in
the telephone receivers.

Fig. 113. Details of Transformer.

The primary coil is made up of a single layer of No.
36 B. S. gauge silk covered wire wound on a thin walled
glass or hard rubber tube. The ends of the tube, which is
2 inches long and 1/4 inch external diameter, are slightly
flared so as not to chafe the band. The primary is
thoroughly shellacked and covered with a single layer of paper.

The secondary is also of No. 36 B. S. silk covered wire
and is wound between two disks of hard rubber, 1/4 inch
thick and 1 1/2 inches in diameter, placed 3/8 inch apart in the
center of the secondary and the intervening space wound
full of wire.

The terminals of both the primary and secondary are
extended to binding posts mounted on the case of the
instrument.

Fig. 114. Method of Joining Ends of Band.

The core or revolving band is made by winding 100
strands of No. 36 silk covered soft iron wire between two
small pegs, placed a distance apart, equal to twice the
circumference of the oval formed by the two pulleys. The
wire is all wound in the same direction. It should be
carefully removed from the pegs and kept taut while it is
slightly twisted, doubled, and then further twisted into a
rope or cord. The ends are threaded together with a
separate piece of insulated wire, into a link which will pass
easily through the primary tube.

Fig. 115. Pulley.

The pulleys around which the band revolves are made of
hard wood. They are 4 inches in diameter and 3/8 inch thick
and have a V-shaped groove cut in the edge. In order to
minimize friction and wear, it is advisable to fit them with
a bearing which may be made out of brass tubing and a
couple of washers. One of the pulleys is geared to a
clockwork motor so that the band makes a complete revolution
about once every two minutes. An old eight day clock
may be adapted for this purpose, or, what is much better,
the motor from an old phonograph.

Fig. 116. Pulley Bearings.

The horseshoe magnet is mounted with its north pole
pointing towards and nearly touching the middle of the
outside of the secondary. The south pole is placed
opposite the end of the primary tube which is on the side towards
which the band is revolving, that is, the band in revolving
passes first over the north pole and then over the south.
Two magnets are sometimes used with their north poles
together in the center of the secondary, and a south pole
opposite each end of the primary tube.

Fig. 117. Circuit of Magnetic Detector.

The commercial instrument is placed in a glass covered
case which protects it from dust and injury. The
clockwork motor is concealed in the lower part of the case. This
is a good plan but an experimental detector may be merely
mounted on a flat wooden base as illustrated in Fig. 112.

The secondary terminals are connected directly to the
telephone receivers while the primary leads to the aerial
and the ground. When the detector is started up it should
make a very slight hissing sound in the telephone receivers
as the band passes slowly through the coils. This shows
the instrument to be in good working order and ready for
the reception of signals.

The Audion.
—Dr. Lee DeForest was led by the
flickering of a sensitive gas flame to investigate whether or not it
would respond to Hertzian vibrations as well as to those of
heat and sound. His experiments led to the invention of
the audion, a peculiar instrument making use of ionized
gas for its operation.

The audion consists of an incandescent lamp having a
metallic filament, on either side of which are a grid and a
plate made of nickel. When the filament is lighted it
throws off ions which act as a relay to high frequency
oscillations passing between the plate and the grid. A
properly constructed audion is exceedingly sensitive and
produces very loud tones in the telephone receivers. It has
the further advantages of entire absence of adjustment
except the governing of the battery voltage, and is capable
of extremely fine tuning.

Fig. 118. Fleming Oscillation Valve.

Fleming originated the oscillation valve illustrated in
Fig. 118. It consists of an ordinary incandescent lamp
with a carbon filament, having a metal cylinder,
C
, placed
around the filament, but attached to an independently
insulated platinum wire sealed in the glass. When the lamp
is lighted by passing a current through the filament, the
incandescent carbon liberates negative ions. If
oscillations are then set up in a circuit which includes a pair of
sensitive telephone receivers and is formed by connecting
the negative terminal of the filament with the platinum
cylinder, negative electricity will be enabled to pass from
the filament to the cylinder but not in the opposite direction,
and so sounds will be produced in the telephone receivers.
High frequency oscillations themselves could not be made
to pass through the telephone receivers because of the
choking action of the iron cores of the electromagnets.

Fig. 119. Flame Audion.

The simple but sensitive form of detector illustrated in
Fig. 119 is not of practical value for commercial work, but
is very interesting as the progenitor of the audion, and
provides a good field for amateur investigation. Its only
drawback is that the gas flame is very difficult to keep
steady and every flicker registers as a sound in the telephone
receivers.

A Bunsen burner using coal gas furnishes the flame, and
a salt of an alkaline metal heated in the flame, the ions.
The hydroxides of caesium, potassium and sodium give the
best results in the order named.

The salt is contained in a piece of trough-shaped platinum
foil, about 3/8 inch long and 1/16 inch wide. This trough is
made the cathode or negative of the telephone circuit and
placed in the outer oxidizing flame just above its juncture
with the interior reducing flame and must be kept
incandescent. The upper electrode or anode is a piece of
platinum wire about 1/16 inch above the trough.

Fig. 120. Circuit of Flame Audion.

The arrangement and construction of the detector is
clearly indicated by the drawing so that it is unnecessary
to go into details. The block,
E
, which fits on the tube of
the Bunsen burner, is made of fiber. Two double binding
posts,
D
, are fastened to
E
to support the rods,
R
, which
are fitted at the tops with binding posts,
B
, into which the
electrodes may be clamped.

Twelve dry cells are connected with a multiple point
switch so that an electromotive force of 6-18 volts, varying
in steps of one cell at a time, may be secured. The flame
is best provided with a mica chimney to protect it from
drafts. By keeping plenty of salt in the trough and
carefully adjusting the voltage, this detector may be made
marvelously sensitive.

[
3
]
The different detectors in order of their sensitiveness are electrolytic, perikon, magnetic, silicon, carborundum.

[
4
]
Peacock ore or bornite, which consists of about 60 parts of copper, 14 parts of iron and 26 parts of sulphur, may be substituted for the chalcopyrites with excellent results.

CHAPTER XIV. TUNING COILS AND TRANSFORMERS.

A tuning coil is merely a variable inductance wound in
single layer on a suitable form.

Fig. 121 illustrates a double slide tuner. The base is a
piece of hard wood, 12 inches long, 1 inch thick and 5 1/2
inches wide. Two wooden heads 4 x 4 x 3/4 inches support
the form upon which the coil is wound.

Fig. 121. Double-slide Tuning Coil.

The form is a piece of wooden curtain pole, 9 inches long
and 3 inches in diameter. Some may prefer to use a
cardboard tube in place of the curtain pole. A tube can be
made by winding a long strip of cardboard 9 inches wide
around a suitable form and cementing the layers together
with shellac. The liberal use of shellac will stiffen the tube
and cause it to better retain its shape. The tube is held
tightly between the two heads by means of a brass rod
which passes through the center and is clamped by two
nuts.

A square brass rod 10 1/2 inches long is fastened to the
center of the top of the heads and a similar rod to the center
of the front face.

Fig. 122. Sliders.

Fig. 122 shows two forms of sliders. The first one is the
better and to be preferred. A short square brass tube,
S
, fits
snugly upon the square brass rod,
R
. It cannot turn around
but is free to slide back and forth. A strip of spring brass,

C
, is soldered to the lower face of the square tube. It is
bent in a double turn and a punch mark made near the lower
end as shown in the illustration. The indentation is made
with a center punch, but should not be deep enough to
break through the metal.

Fig. 123. Double-slide Tuning Coil Circuits.

The little projection on the under side of
C
caused by the
punch mark is the only part of the slider which should make
contact with the wire on the tuning coil. It should slide
easily but firmly along the wires and touch only one at a
time. Long distance signals will be considerably weakened
if the slider touches more than one wire at a time and
short-circuits a turn.

Plate IV. Receiving Circuits. (Straightaway Aerial.)

The slider,
B
, is similar to
A
except that it has a short
length of brass tubing,
T
, soldered to the under side of
S

in place of the brass strip,
C
. A small ball bearing which
just fits the bore of the tube is pushed down into contact
with the wire by means of a small spiral spring inside of the
tube. Both sliders are fitted with a hard rubber handle
so that they may be adjusted without the ringers coming
into contact with the metal.

Fig. 124. Murdock Double-slide Tuning Coil.

Fig. 125. United Wireless Receiving Set.

Two good circuits employing the double slide tuner are
given in Fig. 123. Plates IV and V illustrate the
oscillation or tuning circuits of the most prominent receptor
systems.

If a loop aerial is used, more than one tuning coil is
necessary as shown by the loop aerial oscillation circuits in
Plate V.

Figs. 125 and 126 illustrate the instruments employed
for receiving by the United Wireless Company.

Fig. 126. United Wireless Portable Receiving Set.

In Fig. 125 the handles which are attached to the sliders
of the tuning coils project through long slots cut in the top
and one side of the cabinet.

The tuning coils in the portable outfit are mounted in
a vertical position in back of the aerial switch.

Loosely Coupled Tuning Coil.
—By the use of a loosely
coupled receiving tuner or transformer, the range of a station
is considerably increased, as is also the strength of the
signals, and much finer tuning and selectivity made possible.

Fig. 127 illustrates the construction of such an oscillation
transformer.

The base is wood and measures 14 x 5 1/2 x 1 inches. The
primary winding is wound on a cardboard or fiber tube 4 1/4
inches long, having an internal diameter of 2 3/4 inches and
an external diameter of 3 inches. The heads,
L
and
M
, are
the same size as those of the double slide tuning coil. The
head,
L
, has a circular hole 2 3/4 inches in diameter cut in the
center in order to permit the secondary coil to slide in and
out of the primary.

Fig. 127. Oscillation Transformer.

The secondary coil is a piece of round curtain pole 2 1/2
inches in diameter and 3 inches long. A 5/16-inch hole is
bored through its axis. The head,
K
, of the secondary coil
is 3 3/4 x 3 3/4 x 3/4 inches. A ten-point switch on
K
is so
connected that it divides the secondary into ten equal parts
and permits any number of the divisions to be used as
desired.

Fig. 128. United Wireless Receiving Transformer.

A wooden post,
J
, 2 1/2 inches high and 1 1/4 inches wide,
supports one end of a 1/4-inch brass rod upon which the
secondary slides back and forth.

Fig. 129. Details of Receiving Transformer.

No. 24 B. S. gauge copper wire may be used for winding
both the primary and secondary. It is also the proper size
to use on the double slide tuner. The best method is to use
bare wire, wound with a thread so that a thread is
interposed between adjacent turns of the winding. Give the
whole winding one or two coats of thick shellac and allow it
to harden. Then use a strip of sandpaper to remove the
shellac in a long narrow path immediately below the sliders
so that they may make contact with the wire.

Fig. 130. Slider for Loose Coupler.

Some may prefer to make a loosely coupled tuner in which
the inductance of both coils is adjustable by means of a
sliding contact. In such a case the slider on the secondary coil
must be constructed as illustrated in Fig. 130. The contact
is long and narrow so that it can touch the innermost turns,
when placed within the primary. By slipping the slider off
the end of the rod and reversing it, the contact can be made
to touch the turns next to the head. The square brass rod
is set in a notch cut in the coil head so that the rod is flush
with the top.

When tuning a receiving transformer, place both variable
condensers in a halfway position and adjust the sliding
contacts, first on the primary and then on the secondary, until
the signals are the loudest. Then adjust the condensers.

Fig. 131. Loosely Coupled Tuning Circuits.

To cut out an undesirable station, vary the coupling
between the two coils by sliding the secondary away from the
primary. When several turns on the secondary seem to
give the same results also vary the coupling.

Fig. 132. Combination Loosely and Closely Coupled Tuner.

Fig. 132 illustrates the wiring diagram of a combination
loosely and closely coupled tuner. Two sliding contacts are
placed on the primary coil of the receiving transformer and
connected with a double pole double throw switch as in the
diagram. When the switch is thrown on contacts 1 and 2,
the primary is connected to the detector as a double slide
tuner, and when on 3 and 4 both the primary and secondary
are brought into use as a transformer.

This arrangement may seem cumbersome and is
recommended only as a convenience in experimenting. A loosely
coupled tuning coil is capable of exact tuning, and unless one
understands how to use it, he may not hear a station
because the tuner is not properly adjusted. By using the
double slide tuner first and then throwing the switch so as
to tune in on the transformer, this difficulty may be
eliminated.

Fig. 133. Clapp-Eastham Loose Coupler.

Potentiometer.
—A potentiometer is not properly classed
under the heading of tuning coils, but the construction may
be made so similar that it well appears here.

The potentiometer is merely a variable resistance shunted
across the terminals of the detector battery in the manner
illustrated in the numerous detector circuits. It is used to
reduce the voltage of the battery to a value slightly below
the critical voltage of the detector. The critical voltage of
a detector is the voltage at which its action commences. In
the case of an electrolytic detector, it is the voltage required
to break down the thin film of gas which collects on the
"bare point."

Fig. 134. A Highly Efficient Form of Loose Coupler.

In construction, the potentiometer illustrated in Fig. 135
is in reality a small edition of a double slide tuning coil. It
is wound with No. 28 B. S. gauge German silver wire. Three
binding posts are mounted on the base, two of them
connecting with the ends of the coil and one with the sliding
contact.

Fig. 135. Potentiometer.

In a finely balanced circuit where long distance work
and close tuning are desired, the potentiometer must be
non-inductive.

Fig. 136. Amco Potentiometer.

This may be accomplished by using two potentiometers
wound in opposite directions from one another and
connected in series. The two terminals of the windings are
then connected across the battery and the sliding contacts
led to the detector.

Plate V. Receiving Circuits.

CHAPTER XV. RECEIVING CONDENSERS.

Condensers play an important part in tuning and
adjusting the receiving circuits of a wireless telegraph
station. They are inserted in the circuits for various
purposes. In some places a small condenser shunts the
detector to somewhat equalize any small changes in
capacity which might occur in the detector and throw the
circuit out of tune. In other cases where selectivity is
desired they provide a path for undesirable oscillations and
allow them to flow into the ground without passing through
the detector. Wherever the double slide tuner or the
Fessenden single slider circuit is used, a condenser must be
inserted in the circuit to prevent the wire of the tuning coil
from short-circuiting the telephone receivers and battery.

Fig. 137. Tuning Circuit with and without an Adjustable Condenser.

The value of a condenser may be readily appreciated by
the following experiment. Connect up a detector according
to the diagram shown by
A
of Fig. 137. This circuit will
give good results and the signals will be clear. But change
it to that shown in
B
, by connecting one side of a variable
condenser to the upper contact of the tuning coil and
leading the other side to the ground. Considerable selectivity
may now be attained and the signals will be 50 per cent
louder.

To be of any value for a receiving circuit the capacity of
the condenser must be adjustable, but there are many places
where a fixed condenser is of service.

The average capacity of such condensers generally ranges
around .003 of a microfarad, but cannot be predetermined, as
it depends upon many factors which vary greatly in
different stations. Even if specific dimensions were given for
the construction of a paper condenser of stated capacity,
the experimenter would very seldom succeed in constructing
his condenser and have it of this value when finished. The
paper used as the dielectric and the pressure applied to the
condenser would make the difference.

The best plan is to build one up in the form of a roll as
follows. Three thin tin foil strips 3 1/2 inches wide and four
feet long are separated by strips of thin paraffined paper
4 inches wide and four and one-half feet long. The two
outside strips of tin foil are connected together and form one
terminal of the condenser. The middle strip of tin foil is the
other. The outside strips of tin foil are covered with
paraffined paper and the whole rolled up. If thin paper and
tin foil are used the condenser will form a roll 4 inches long
and less than an inch in diameter.

Two or three such condensers should be constructed, and
one of them connected up in the circuit where it is desirable
to use it. By unrolling a little of the condenser and cutting
one or two inches off at a time the proper size may be
determined.

As explained in Chapter VII, two equal condensers
connected in series have one-half the capacity of either. By
connecting them in parallel the capacity is the sum of the
two. In this manner it is not hard to first find the
approximate capacity, which gives the best results before cutting
the condenser.

Fig. 138. Tubular Condenser.

When the proper value is found, place the condenser in
a brass tube about 5 inches long and 1 inch in diameter.
The tube is fitted with hard rubber flanges to close the ends.
A binding post is mounted on each flange, and connects with
the terminal of the condenser to which it is nearest.

Mounting a condenser in this manner gives it a much
better appearance and it occupies less space than otherwise.
Fixed condensers are used in two cases only, to shunt the
condenser and to prevent the tuning coil from
short-circuiting the telephone receivers. In any other position they are
worthless.

Variable Condensers.
—A simple form of adjustable
condenser which may be quickly made for a special
experiment is constructed in the following manner. A wooden
curtain pole 2 inches in diameter and 18 inches long is
covered with a layer of tin foil. The tin foil must be laid on
smoothly and cemented with shellac. A layer of paraffined
paper is then placed over the tin foil. A piece of sheet
copper or tin 6 3/4 inches wide and 18 inches long is rolled up
in a cylinder to fit over the rod with its tin foil and paper.
The rod is fastened at one end to a base board about 20
inches long and 4 inches wide, by means of a bracket, or it
may be mounted on a smaller base in a vertical position.

Connections are made to the tin foil and to the outside
metal tube. By sliding the tube back and forth on the rod
the condenser may be given a variable capacity.

Fig. 139. Variable Condenser.

The best variable condensers are constructed so that the
dielectric between the two plates is formed by air. There
are consequently no losses of energy in the condenser, for
this mode of construction eliminates all dielectric hysteresis.

Fig. 139 shows such a variable condenser and Fig. 140
the details. It is possible to do very close, selective tuning
with this instrument. The efficiency of the receiving circuit
may be considerably improved if one is used wherever a
condenser is required.

A rectangular box is built up in the manner shown in
Fig. 135. The sides,
D
, are 6 inches long, 4 11/16 inches wide
and 1/2 inch thick. The top,
A
, is 6 inches long, 1 13/16 inches
wide and 1/2 inch thick. The bottom,
B
, has the same width
and thickness but is 11 inches long. Eleven grooves are
cut in
A
and
B
as shown in the cross section. The grooves
are 1/16 inch wide, 3/16 inch deep and 1/16 inch apart. They are
formed by setting the blade of a circular saw so that it
projects 3/16 inch above the table or bed. After cutting one
groove, the guide is moved 1/8 inch and another cut made.

Fig. 140. Details of Variable Condenser.

Eleven metal plates,
P
, are required, six fixed and five
movable. They are made of No. 22 gauge sheet brass and
measure 4 x 6 inches. Six of them are placed in the grooves
in the box in such a manner that an empty groove is left
between each one. The six plates are then electrically
connected together by soldering a strip of brass across their
rear ends.

Fig. 141. Sliding Plate Variable Condenser.

Five slots each 1/4 inch deep and 1/4 inch apart are made
with a hack saw in a piece of brass,
C
, 1 1/2 inches long,
3/4 inch wide and 1/2 inch thick. A small pin 1/2 inch long is
set in the center of
C
on the opposite side from the saw
cuts. A fiber handle 1/2 inch in diameter and 1 1/2 inches long
is fastened to the pin.

The five movable brass plates are set in the grooves
between the six fixed plates. They are allowed to project
three or four inches out of the box. The yoke,
C
, is then
soldered across the ends so that each one of the movable
plates fits into its corresponding saw cut.

The capacity of the condenser is varied by sliding the
movable plates back and forth between the fixed plates.

A binding post is soldered to the yoke,
C
, and another
one to the strip which holds the fixed plates together.
Connections are made to the binding posts with lamp cord or
some other flexible conductor which will not interfere with
the movement of the plates.

The instrument is finished by staining the woodwork and
giving it a coat of varnish or shellac.

CHAPTER XVI. TELEPHONE RECEIVERS AND HEADBANDS.

A pair of high resistance telephone receivers in nice
adjustment constitute one of the most sensitive electrical
instruments in existence and will detect an exceedingly
weak current.

The only type of receiver of much service in wireless
telegraphy is that known as a watch case or pony receiver. It
is small and compact so that it may be attached to a
headband and clamped against the ear.

Fig. 142. Types of Permanent Magnets.

The permanent magnets of a watch-case receiver are
usually in the form of either a ring or a horseshoe as shown
by Fig. 142. The first form has "consequent" poles and
is considered somewhat superior to the horseshoe, since the
lines of force are not so liable to pass across the pole pieces
before they pass through the electromagnets and the
diaphragm.

The ordinary low resistance telephone receiver is
perfectly well suited to the telephone work for which it was
designed and adjusted, and will give good service on a
wireless receptor for short distances, but can be considerably
improved by following the suggestions and instructions
given below.

The principal objection to the ordinary receiver is that
it does not contain enough turns of wire on its bobbins.
This is easily remedied by carefully rewinding them with a
very fine silk covered, pure copper magnet wire no larger
than No. 40 B. S. gauge. This will increase the number
of turns and also the resistance, but it must not be inferred
that resistance is to be desired. This is a common
impression of amateurs who do not understand the underlying
principle, that the strength of an electromagnet varies
directly as the number of turns of wire, multiplied by the
amperes flowing through the magnet. When a telephone
receiver is wound with a finer wire the resistance is increased,
cutting down both the current and the strength of the
magnet. But if pure copper wire is used, and the winding
not carried beyond the point where the circumference of
the outside layer becomes twice as great as the
circumference of the first layer, the number of turns increases faster
than the resistance and the magnet strength is considerably
greater than before the receiver was rewound.

No. 40 B. S. gauge silk covered wire is often used for this
purpose, but the best results are obtained with enameled
covered wire of the same size. It is possible to wind almost
three times as much of the enameled wire on a telephone
bobbin as silk wire of the same size. The difference is due
to the thickness of the insulation. An ordinary double pole
watch-case receiver will have a resistance of 800-1,000
ohms when wound with silk covered wire and 1,500-1,800
ohms when wound with enameled wire.

To rewind a telephone receiver, first unscrew the cap and
remove the diaphragm, then remove the bobbins by
unloosening the screws with the aid of a screw driver.
Unwind the old wire and examine the empty bobbins to see
that wherever the wire is liable to come into contact with
the metal that it is well insulated with paraffined paper
or some other equally good material. Then wind the new
wire on in smooth even layers and when it is completed
fasten the bobbins back on the permanent magnets and
connect them up. The current should flow through in
opposite directions so that the north pole of one and the
south pole of the other is on top. Do not trust splice
connections but solder them using acid as a flux.

The Navy Department specifies that its wireless receivers
shall be wound with copper wire of not less than 0.0015
inch in diameter and the diaphragm to have a diameter
of 1 3/4 inches and a thickness of 0.004 inch. The
resistance of the coils is specified at 1,000-1,100 ohms.
There is not much advantage in greatly exceeding the
number of turns possible with this winding, for to obtain
them a much finer wire than No. 40 B. S. gauge is
necessary and the ratio between resistance and turns becomes
greater.

The second objection to the ordinary receiver is that the
diaphragms are very often too thick. A receiver having a
thin diaphragm is preferable because when a weak current
is sent through the coils, the change in magnet strength is
greater. But this may be carried to excess and the
diaphragm made so thin that it cannot absorb sufficient lines
of force to properly play its part. The best thickness then
for a diaphragm can only be determined experimentally
and depends much upon the diameter. The distance from
the poles and the strength of the magnets will also have
considerable bearing on the thickness. The ordinary phone
will be very sensitive and give clear tones with diaphragms
ranging from .01-.004 inch.

The relation between the thickness and the diameter is
shown by the following: If the diaphragm of a receiver is
increased in diameter, the tones will become more distinct,
but if the increase is carried too far they will become
indistinct and the only remedy is to thicken the diaphragm.
Likewise if after clearness is secured the diaphragm is
thickened so that the tones again become indistinct, the
diameter must be increased.

Fig. 143. Grinding Tool.

The third objection is that such receivers are not
carefully and properly adjusted. The adjustment is also a
matter of experiment and is accomplished by comparison
of the receiver in question with one which is known to be
in a sensitive condition. The adjusting may be done by
means of the tool shown in Fig. 143.

This tool is made from an ordinary file by grinding off
the teeth on one side save for a distance of about 3/4 inch in
the middle. The grinding may be done on an emery wheel.
The part (
a
) is used for filing the pole pieces and thus
making the distance between them and the diaphragm greater.
The tool has the advantage over an ordinary file of
permitting the poles to be filed without removal from the
receiver and without grooving the diaphragm bed or the
receiver case.

To lessen the distance between the poles and the
diaphragm, lay the receiver bed downward on a piece of fine
emery paper and rub with a circular scouring motion. If
the emery paper is placed on a perfectly flat surface no
trouble will be experienced in grinding the bed down evenly.

When filing the pole pieces rub with the same circular
motion so as to grind off all sides evenly. Test from time
to time by passing a straight edge over the bed in all
directions while holding to the light and looking between the
straight edge and the poles. In this manner the distance
separating the diaphragm and the poles may be gauged and
whether or not it is the same on all sides. Bear in mind
that if the diaphragm is thin, the attraction of the
permanent magnets will cause it to bend in towards the poles.

In case you have a pair of receivers built for wireless work,
which appear to be in good condition but do not give
their former results, the last thing to do is to tamper with
the adjustment. The most common cause, when the tones
are impaired, is dirt or dust accumulated on the poles or
diaphragm and damping its vibration. The cap should
be carefully unscrewed and the diaphragm examined to see
if it is bent. If so, replace with a new one of the same size.
Remove any dirt or filings, and if the diaphragm is rusty
clean it by laying it on a flat surface and rubbing it with a
piece of fine emery paper. Then give it a thin coat of
colorless lacquer. Examine the magnets and pole pieces to see
if they have become loosened and if so tighten them.

Or the trouble may be that the permanent magnets have
lost part of their magnetism, and almost any receiver which
has been in use for some length of time will bear having its
magnets strengthened. If they are found to be weak they
should be removed and remagnetized. This is
accomplished by winding a coil of No. 18 B. S. gauge wire around
them and sending a heavy direct current through for a few
minutes.

Fig. 144. Parts of a Holtzer Cabot Receiver.

In carrying out any of these suggestions remember to
work with one receiver at a time, keeping the other for
comparison, so that by repeated tests you may tell whether
or not an improvement is being made and when well enough
is reached, let it alone.

Fig. 144 shows the construction of a telephone receiver
manufactured by the Holtzer Cabot Co. of Brookline, Mass.
The permanent magnets and bobbins are mounted in a
metal cup,
B
, which supports the diaphragm,
A
. The metal
cup is enclosed in a hard rubber shell,
C
, and fitted with a
cap,
D
.

The complete receivers are mounted on an adjustable
headband and fitted with pneumatic ear cushions which
make them set more comfortably and shut out extraneous
noise. These receivers are wound to all resistances used in
the wireless field but, for the experimenter, those having a
resistance of 1000 ohms apiece will give the best all around
results.

Fig. 145. Holtzer Cabot Head Set.

It is very desirable that the receivers should be fitted
with a comfortable headband which will hold the telephones
in close adjustment to the ears. Fig. 146 shows the
construction of such a band.

Fig. 146. Adjustable Head Band.

Two brass straps, 1 inch wide, 12 inches long and 1/16 inch
thick are necessary. Two 1/8-inch holes,
mm
, are bored in
them 3/16 inch from one end and the end bent up at an angle
along a line 3/8 inch from the end as shown by the drawing.
A cover is made for the straps, by sewing two strips of
leather 1 1/4 inches wide and 12 inches long, together along
their edges. The covers may then be slipped over the
straps. Two 1/16-inch brass strips, 3/8 inch wide and a little
longer than one-half the circumference of the watch-case
receiver to be fitted to the head band, are bent into stirrups
as shown in the illustration by
Y
. The ends of the stirrups
are fitted with two pivots,
PP
, which are riveted in a hole.
Two holes or recesses are bored in the shell of each receiver,
on the sides 180 degrees apart. The pivots,
PP
, fit into
these holes and form bearings in which the receivers can
turn and adjust themselves to the ears. The stirrup has
two small holes,
hh
, bored 3/8 inch apart at the top and
tapped to receive a small screw. The screws pass through
the holes,
mm
, and hold the stirrups at the end of their
respective strap.

The leather-covered straps are bound together by means
of two clamps which permit the head band to be adjusted
to suit the wearer. The clamps,
C
, are made from 1/16-inch
brass 3/8 inch wide. Their form and construction may be
best understood from the drawing. A small screw eye is
cut in half and soldered to the center of the upper side of
the clamp so that the receiver cord may be passed through
the eyelet,
E
.

The telephone receivers should be connected in series by
means of a flexible telephone cord.

CHAPTER XVII. OPERATION.

The first essential in order to manage a wireless station,
after learning the construction and handling of the
instruments, is to acquire a thorough knowledge of the telegraph
codes.

The two codes in use in wireless service are the Morse and
the Continental. They are given below.

In some cases, the intending wireless operator has had
some experience with a Morse sounder and then it is merely
a matter of transition and of accustoming the ear to a new
sound. However it is always best to learn the Morse code
first as Continental is merely an adaptation in which no
space characters appear.

A beginner may learn to receive most easily by
communicating with another person to whom it is also new. They
should first memorize all the letters of the code and practice
transmitting before commencing any communication.

It is a great mistake for a beginner to start by writing
down the dots and dashes as he receives them on paper.
He should make an effort to translate them and set the
characters and words down directly. This at first will
sacrifice speed but will make a better operator and enable one
to become proficient sooner than if he begins otherwise.

In case two complete sets of wireless apparatus are not
convenient, one may learn to read from a buzzer connected
to a key and a battery. The signals may be read directly
from the sound of the buzzer itself, but if a pair of telephone
receivers are connected across the terminals, a sound will
be produced in the phones similar to that of a wireless
receptor.

In sending, avoid a short, choppy or jerky style and
handle the key with a light but firm touch. Keep the dots
and dashes firm and of the proper relative length, as also
the spaces between letters and words.

The following suggestions and instructions adapted from
the Rules and Regulations governing Naval Wireless
Telegraph Stations may be of value and service to many in
operating their instruments.

"The operating room should be well lighted and free from
vibration. The room should have a well insulated entrance
for the aerial and should be fitted with an operating table
about two and one-half feet wide, not less than seven feet
long and of a convenient height for working the sending key.

The table should be of dry, well-seasoned wood and the
instruments should be mounted on the table at safe sparking
distances from each other.

"The connections should all be as direct as possible and
well insulated. High potential leads should be kept away
from low potential leads and where they cross it should be
at nearly right angles.

"Sending key contacts must be kept clean and flat with
surfaces parallel to each other.

"All sliding contacts, especially in the receiving tuning
coils, should be kept clean and bright and free from foreign
matter. A sending set working at low power with all
connections good, closed and open circuits in resonance, no
sparking from edge of condenser, jar or plates, no glow from
aerial and no sparking to rigging, is utilizing its power much
more efficiently than the same set pushed to the limit with
high resistance connections, sparking at all points and out
of resonance."

Fig. 147. Marconi Station at Siasconset, Mass.

It is a good plan for any amateur to keep a note book in
which he can record the various distances he has been able
to receive and transmit. He should try more than one
circuit and jot down the results. It is then possible to bring
a station up to an efficiency which cannot be reached in
any other manner.

ELECTRICAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS.

Accumulator:

A cell whose positive and negative
electrodes are formed or deposited by a current flowing from
a separate source.

Aerial:

A network or a number of wires insulated from
surrounding objects and suspended in the air to emit or
intercept electromagnetic waves.

Alternating Current:

An electric current, of which the
direction of flow reverses a number of times per second.

Ampere:

The quantity of current which will flow
through a resistance of one ohm under a potential of one
volt. The unit of current.

Ampere Hour:

The quantity of electricity passed when
flowing at the rate of one ampere for one hour.

Anode:

The positive terminal of a broken circuit or a
source of electricity. It is the carbon of a cell or the pole
at which a current enters a solution.

Capacity:

The relative ability of a conductor to receive
and retain an electric charge.

Circuit:

An unbroken conducting path for an electric
current.

Condenser:

A device for receiving and storing up electrostatic energy.

Cycle:

The full period of reversal of an alternating
current. A 60-cycle current is one making 60 complete
reversals per second.

Detector, Wireless:

An instrument for detecting
oscillations in the aerial of a receiving station. It either varies
its own internal resistance or generates a weak intermittent
direct current similar in time and duration with the signals
emitted by the transmitting station.

Dielectric:

A non-conductor or insulator. It usually
refers to the material interposed between the oppositely
charged coatings of a condenser.

Direct Current:

A current flowing in one direction only.

Electrode:

The terminal of an open electric circuit or a
conductor carrying a current and immersed in an electrolyte.

Electrolysis:

The separation of a chemical compound
into its elements by the action of an electric current.

Electrolyte:

A solution which will conduct a current of
electricity.

Electromagnet:

A mass of iron which is magnetized by
the passage of a current of electricity through a coil of wire
wound around the mass and insulated therefrom.

Farad:

The unit of electrical capacity. A condenser
having a capacity of one farad would be raised to a potential
of one volt by one ampere flowing for one second.

Field of Force:

The space which is under magnetic stress
in the neighborhood of a magnet or a wire carrying a current.

Helix, Transmitting:

A coil of heavy wire which furnishes
the inductance for the closed oscillation circuit of a wireless
transmitter and acts as an auto-transformer to raise the
voltage of the high frequency currents.

Henry:

The unit of induction. It is the induction in a
circuit when the electromotive force induced in this circuit
is one volt, while the inducing current varies at the rate of
one ampere per second.

Inductance:

The property of an electric circuit whereby
lines of force are developed around it.

Induction Coil:

An instrument or device consisting of
two independent coils of wire wound around an iron core,
and which by magnetic induction steps up an intermittent
direct current from a low to a high voltage.

Insulator:

A non-conductor or a substance impervious to
the passage of electricity.

Key:

A device for making and breaking a current into
periods corresponding to the dots and dashes of the telegraph code.

Kilowatt:

1,000 watts. See watt.

Leyden Jar:

A static condenser which will store up
static electricity and is cylindrical in form. So-called
because it was originated in Leyden, Holland.

Multiple:

The term expressing the connection of several
pieces of electrical apparatus in parallel with each other so
that the current is divided between them.

Ohm:

The unit of resistance. It is arbitrarily taken as
the resistance of a column of mercury, one square millimeter
in cross sectional area and 106 centimeters in height.

Parallel:

The same meaning as multiple. Parallel
circuits are those which start at a common point and end at
a common point.

Polarization:

The collection of hydrogen upon the
positive electrode of a primary cell with a consequent loss of
voltage.

Potential:

Voltage or electrical force.

Resistance:

The quality of an electrical conductor
whereby it opposes the passage of an electric current. The unit
of resistance is the ohm.

Rheostat:

A variable resistance to regulate the strength
of an electric current.

Series:

Opposed to parallel or multiple. Instruments
in series are so connected that the current passes from one
to the other and does not divide.

Spark Gap:

An air gap or open space between two electrodes for the passage of a high voltage discharge.

Storage Battery:

See accumulator.

Transformer:

A device for stepping up or stepping down
the voltage of an alternating current by means of magnetic
induction.

Tuning Coil:

A variable inductance for changing the
period of the receptor circuit.

Volt:

The unit of electrical force or potential. The
electromotive force which, if steadily applied to a conductor
whose resistance is one ohm, will produce a current of one
ampere.

Voltmeter:

An instrument for measuring voltage.

Watt:

Unit of work. It is the rate of work of one ampere
flowing under a potential of one volt. Seven hundred and
forty-six watts represent one electrical horsepower.

Plate VI. DeForest and Marconi Systems.

CHAPTER XVIII. THE AMATEUR AND THE WIRELESS LAW. WHAT IT IS; HOW TO COMPLY; HOW TO SECURE A LICENSE.

On August 13, 1912, Congress enacted a "Wireless Law"
to regulate radio communication. The whole law may be
found in the appendix of this book, but briefly as far as
the amateur is concerned it is as follows:

An amateur may not use transmitting apparatus which
is sufficiently powerful to send radio signals across any of
the boundaries of the state in which he is located and
which can be detected by a sensitive receiving set located
just beyond the state boundary, nor can he use apparatus
which is powerful enough to interfere with the reception of
signals by others from beyond the state boundaries unless
he has a
license
.

An amateur may receive messages from anywhere at
any time without a license provided that his station is not
also fitted with transmitting apparatus.

In other words if the amateur possesses a receiving
outfit only which is in working order or if he has both
transmitter and receptor and the former is not powerful enough
to send signals out of the state in which he lives, or to
interfere with the reception of messages by another when
the messages come from beyond the state boundary a

license
is unnecessary.

This is of course somewhat unfair for those living near
the center of large states for they may operate almost as
they please with ordinary instruments with no fear of the
signals going beyond the border, while those living within
a few miles of another state must secure a license.

If an amateur has a license he may transmit messages
beyond the state border, but he must not employ a wave
length greater than 200 meters or a power input into the
transmitter of more than 1 K.W. without special
permission.

Fig. 148. Experimental Amateur Station of W. Haddon, Brooklyn, N. Y.

If the amateur is within five nautical miles of an army
or navy station equipped with radio apparatus his power
input must not be more than 1 K.W.

Complying with Law.
—After a license is secured, or
rather as a matter of fact in order to secure it, the wave
length must not be greater than 200 meters. In order to
secure such a wave length the effective portion of the
aerial cannot usually be made greater than 115 feet in
consideration of the amount which the lead-in, helix and
ground wire add.

Fig. 149. Complete Receiving Outfit Consisting of Receiving Transformer, Detector, Fixed Condenser, Loading Coil, Two Variable Condensers, Potentiometer, Battery, Switches, etc.

Such an aerial will serve well for transmitting purposes,
but is too short for receiving very long distances. If the
amateur desires to pick up long distance messages he must
employ two aerials, a short one for transmitting and a
long one for receiving. If it is desirable to use the long
aerial for both transmitting and receiving its wave length
may be brought down to 200 meters or under, while
transmitting by placing a large glass plate condenser of the
proper capacity in series with the aerial. It may be
short-circuited with a suitable switch when receiving.

The law also says that the transmitting wave must be
pure, and must be sharply tuned, which means that the
wave must be of one length and not, as is very often
the case, composed of two or more waves of different
lengths.

In order to comply with this restriction, the use of an
oscillation helix or loosely coupled helix is necessary. A
rotary or quenched gap is also necessary in place of the
ordinary spark gap.

The construction of all three of these instruments is
described farther on.

How to Obtain a License.
—In order to obtain a license
send to the nearest Radio Inspector; Radio Inspectors are
stationed at the Custom Houses at the following cities:
Boston, Mass.; New York, N. Y.; Savannah, Ga.;
Baltimore, Md.; Cleveland, Ohio; Chicago, Ill.; Seattle,
Wash.; New Orleans, La.; San Francisco, Cal.; and
obtain a copy of The Wireless Law, 8-6412, The
Regulations Governing Radio Communication, The Berlin
International Radio-telegraphic Convention, and the
necessary Application Forms.

Look over the Wireless Law, the Regulations and the
Berlin Convention pamphlet, then fill out Form 756.
This is an application for an operator's license.

Fig. 150. Receiving Outfit Consisting of Receiving Transformer, Fixed Condenser and Detector.

If the amateur is not already in possession of a certificate
of skill as an operator it will be necessary to find out, from
the commandant at the nearest one of the stations, listed on
page 4 of the Regulations as being the places where
examinations are given, on what days the examinations are held.
If the amateur is able to pass the examination, an

operator's license
will be issued. Then fill out Form 757 and
forward it to the Radio Inspector. If he thinks your
station conforms to the regulations without inspection the
license will be issued; if not, the license will be issued
after inspection.

There are no fees to pay in connection with securing
any of the licenses.

APPARATUS REQUIRED IN MANY INSTANCES IN ORDER TO COMPLY WITH THE WIRELESS LAW.

OSCILLATION HELIX

The oscillation helix has almost become a necessity in
order to comply with the regulations of the Wireless Law
regarding wave form, except in those stations where a
quenched gap is used.

Fig. 151. Amco Oscillation Helix.

The wave emitted by many stations is not pure. It is
composed usually of two or three separate waves of
different lengths instead of all the energy being confined to
oscillations of one period. It is possible to tune such a
wave in two or more places or "humps," as they are called,
on the tuning coil. It is obvious that a wave possessing
such humps cannot be closely tuned and is liable to
interfere with the signals of another station. This is one of
the principal causes of interference.

The reason for this phenomenon is simple. The action
of a transmitter is to first charge a condenser. When the
potential of the condenser rises to sufficient value it
discharges across the spark gap and sets up oscillations in
the
closed
circuit. These oscillations immediately induce
oscillations in the
open
circuit or aerial system and part of
the energy passes off into the ether as electro-magnetic
waves. However, the oscillations in the
aerial
system do
not immediately die away after the oscillations in the
closed circuit cease during the interim until the next
condenser discharge, but continue to surge and react upon the
dosed circuit to sufficient extent to induce therein currents
which surge back and forth long after the current from
the condenser discharge has died away.

We might call the oscillations due to the condenser
discharge
primary oscillations
and those induced in the
aerial thereby
secondary oscillations
. Those which are
then set up in the closed circuit by the reaction of the

secondary
currents are
tertiary
. This third train of
oscillations persist after the secondary currents have died away,
and induce another set of oscillations in the aerial which
send out a second set of electromagnetic waves differing
in length from the first.

The oscillations which take place after the initial surge
in the closed and open circuits are naturally somewhat
weak. By using an oscillation helix in which the primary
and secondary are separated from each other it is possible
to eliminate the third and fourth trains of oscillations and
all others having a tendency to follow, by placing the
circuits apart so that the weak oscillations are not strong
enough* to react across the intervening space. The
immediate oscillations set up by the condenser discharge are
strong enough to act across the space and set up powerful
oscillations in the aerial.

Fig. 152. Details of Oscillation Helix Construction.

A hot wire ammeter placed in the aerial circuit of a
transmitter employing an oscillation transformer will not
indicate as much current as if placed in the same position
in a circuit using an ordinary helix; but in spite of the fact,
a transmitter using an oscillation helix will send farther
because the energy is concentrated in waves of one
length.

The construction of one type of oscillation helix has
already been outlined on page 92. The form shown in
Fig. 152 has no special advantages over the other but is
preferred by many experimenters.

It is of the "pancake" type, so-called because of the
flat form of the windings which are made in the shape of
a spiral of brass ribbon set in a slotted frame.

The dimensions of the helix are clearly apparent from
the drawing. The primary is composed of seven turns of
brass ribbon 1/2 inch wide and 1/16 inch thick. The
secondary should have from 10 to 15 turns of ribbon 3/8 x 1/16.
The coils may be slid back and forth on the brass rod so
that the distance between them is variable. Connection
is made to the coils by means of suitable clips. A clip
similar to that shown on page 92, but made to snap on a
flat ribbon instead of a round wire, will serve the purpose.

QUENCHED SPARK GAP.

A "quenched" gap is made up of a number of brass
or copper disks accurately turned to a true surface and
separated by mica or rubber rings about .01 inch thick.
The spark discharge takes place in the air-tight space at
the center of the disks, inside of the mica rings.

The quenched gap has several advantages over other
forms. It is practically noiseless and the nuisance of a
crashing discharge may be avoided by its use.

The large surface offered to the spark by the disks cools
the spark and quickly stops the oscillations in the closed
circuit, and thereby leaves the open circuit and aerial
system free to vibrate in its own period and therefore
radiates
pure
waves. By pure wave a wave of one length
is meant.

A quenched gap cannot be used on a set of over 1 K.W.
power without artificial cooling by an air blast.

Fig. 153. Quenched Gap.

Fig. 154. Quenched Gap.

Fig. 154 shows an efficient form of quenched gap for use
in stations up to 1 K.W. in power.

The disks are shown in detail in Fig. 155. They are
cast out of copper and then turned perfectly true and
smooth in a lathe. After surfacing, the discharge surface
should be heavily silver plated and buffed smooth.

Fig. 155. Details of Disk and Ring.

The disks are piled on a marble base with a mica ring
between each. They are clamped down by a strong set
screw mounted on a heavy brass yoke. Enough pressure
should be brought to bear to force the plates tightly
together and make them air tight.

Fig. 156. Explanatory Drawing of Quenched Gap.

The number of disks required is governed by the voltage
of the charging condenser. Generally speaking it is one
section of .01-inch gap for each thousand volts delivered
by the secondary of the transformer. It is very
important to secure just the proper number of disks. If properly
adjusted, the quenched gap will give one discharge for each
alternation of the current and produce a musical tone.

The quenched gap is placed in the same position in the
transmitting circuit as any other form of gap.

ROTARY GAPS.

Rotary gaps are divided into two general classes, the
synchronous gap and the non-synchronous gap.

The former usually consists of one or more stationary
electrodes and a rotating member made like a star wheel
with projecting spokes. This rotary member is attached
directly to the shaft of the alternator or motor generator
and arranged so that a spoke always comes opposite a
stationary member at the exact moment that the
maximum of potential is obtained in the condenser. Such an
arrangement permits one discharge for each alternation of
the current and produces a pure musical note easily
distinguished in the telephone receivers at a distant station.

In the non-synchronous rotary gap the wheel is driven at
a high rate of speed without any regard to synchronism
with the alternations of the current.

The rotary gap shown in Fig. 157 is of the
non-synchronous type.

Fig. 157. Amco Rotary Gap.

The rotating member is cast from an alloy of equal
parts of zinc and aluminum. It is necessary to first make
a wooden pattern from which the casting may be made.
The details of the wheel are shown in Fig. 158. The
casting must be placed in a lathe chuck and turned true. It is
mounted on a hard rubber disk 2 7/8 inches in diameter and
1/4 of an inch thick. The disk serves to insulate the revolving
electrodes from the motor shaft. The "rotor" is mounted
upon the shaft by means of a small brass bushing which
passes through the center of the disk.

Fig. 158. Details of Revolving Parts of Rotary Gap.

The motor must be well built and capable of running at
high speed. A "Juno" motor will be found very
satisfactory. When running free its speed is about 4500 r.p.m.
With the rotor in place the speed is about 3600 r.p.m.

The motor should be mounted on a heavy marble base
capable of absorbing any little vibration that the gap may
be subject to when running at high speed.

The stationary electrodes are made in the same manner
as those for an ordinary gap and consists of two flanged
zinc electrodes mounted upon threaded brass rods
supported by two hexagonal standards. The axis of the
electrodes should be the same height above the base as
that of the motor shaft.

The rotor should be carefully balanced so that it is
practically free from vibration by boring small holes in the
back face so as to make the weight on opposite sides equal.

Fig. 159. Details of Rotary Gap.

The motor may be driven by a battery or from the same
source that supplies the transformer, in series with two or
three suitable lamps. A motor wound to run directly
from the 110-volt line or a higher potential must have its
fields wound with very fine wire and is apt to give trouble
through "burn-outs," due to "kick back." When the
motor is operated on batteries or is wound for running in
series with a lamp the danger is lessened.

A rotary gap is placed in the transmitting circuit in the
same position as any other gap. Its use will result in a
wonderful increase in the transmitting range of almost any
station, for not only will the amount of energy passing
through the aerial be raised, but the clear musical tone
given off is more plainly distinguishable at a greater
distance in the receiving station than a spark of the ordinary
sort.

"KICK BACK."

The oscillations taking place in the closed circuit and
aerial system of a wireless transmitter continue to surge
after the current in the condenser has dropped below a
certain value, and react upon the primary winding of the
coil or transformer by induction and produce high voltage,
high frequency currents termed "kick back," in wireless
telegraph parlance.

"Kick back," wherever it exists to an appreciable
extent, is liable to damage insulation and cause possible
"burn-outs." The "kick-back" preventers illustrated
in the accompanying diagrams will be found an efficient
method of avoiding this danger.

Fig. 160. Methods of Preventing "Kick Back."

The first method shows an ordinary pressed telephone
condenser of about two microfarads capacity connected
directly across the A. C. mains near the transformer
terminals, in series with two 6-ampere fuses. The
condenser is shunted by a small spark gap made of needle
points with a very small space, about .005 of an inch,
between them.

The second method is an elaboration of the first and
shows two sets of condensers in series with fuses and
bridged by spark gaps with a "ground" through a third
condenser connected between. This second method is the
best and is often used to prevent delicate instruments,
such as a voltmeter, from the effects of "kick back."

A proper "kick-back" preventer is part of the Fire
Insurance Underwriters requirements for a wireless
telegraph station.

Receiving Apparatus.

THE VARIOMETER.

A variometer is a tuning device in which two coils of
wire are placed in series and connected so that the turns
can be made to oppose one another. One coil is movable
and by turning it the currents flowing through the
adjacent coils oppose each other and decrease the
self-induction of the whole and consequently the period of the
circuit.

Fig. 161. Variometer.

The accompanying illustration shows the constructive
details of an efficient form of variometer.

The coils are wound around two cardboard cylinders.
One cylinder is 6 inches in diameter and the other 5 inches.
Both are 2 inches long. The large cylinder is wound with
twenty-five turns of No. 22 B. S. gauge single silk covered
wire wound in two sections so as to leave a space 3/8 inch
wide in the center. The small cylinder is wound in the
same manner with the same size of wire but contains
thirty turns so as to make the length of wire in each of
the coils practically equal.

The space in the center of each of the coils allows a
supporting rod to pass through without interfering with
the wire. The shaft is a piece of 5/16
brass
rod about 7 1/2
inches long. The upper end is provided with a knob and
a pointer. The large coil is mounted on the under side of
a wooden cover made to fit a containing case of the proper
size to receive the variometer and of a style similar to that
ordinarily used to enclose a variable condenser.

The shaft passes through the larger coil, at two points
diametrically opposite, but should not fit tightly. It also
passes through the smaller coil but is fastened to the
latter by means of a cross bar so that when the knob is
turned the coil will revolve also. The coils are connected
by means of a piece of braided wire or flexible conductor,
long enough so as not to interfere with the movement of
the inner coil.

The outside terminals of the coils terminate in binding
posts mounted on the top of the case. When making a
variometer be careful not to employ any iron or steel in its
construction, not even iron screws.

The variometer is placed in the receiving circuit by
connecting it in series with the aerial before it reaches the
tuning coil or loose coupler.

NEW CRYSTAL DETECTORS.

Silicon Detector.
—The silicon detector is always
interesting because it was one of the first mineral rectifiers
to come into extended use. The photograph shown
below illustrates one of the latest forms of the silicon
detector.

Fig. 162. Silicon Detector.

The large cup supported by the left-hand standard
contacts several pieces of fused silicon embedded in fusible
alloy. The right-hand standard supports a movable
"offset" cup the same as that used on the Perikon type of
Detector. A small piece of
arsenic
is mounted in this cup
and may be brought to bear against any portion of any
of the silicon crystals.

Pyron Detector.
—The Pyron detector is not new, but
the photograph shows a very simple and efficient form in
which a fine wire is brought to bear against a crystal of
iron pyrites mounted in a small cup.

Fig. 163. Pyron Detector.

Galena Detector.
—Although
galena
is named in the
list of sensitive minerals on page 132 it has come into such
extensive use as a detector since the first edition of this
book to be worthy of special attention. Galena detectors
are often spoken of as "cat-whisker" detectors because
of the long fine wire used to secure a delicate contact with
the mineral.

The mineral is usually placed in a cup and held in
position by imbedding in fusible alloy or clamped with a
set screw. The best surface of the mineral should be
selected by testing previous to imbedding it in the cup.
Contact is made with the surface of the mineral by means
of a piece of No. 30 phosphor bronze wire mounted on
the end of a short brass rod fitted with an adjusting screw
so that by turning or twisting the surface of the mineral
may be "searched" and the tension varied.

Fig. 164. Galena Detector.

Such an arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 164. The
base is a hard rubber block 3 3/4 x 1 3/4 x 1/2. The binding
posts are of the type commonly used on electrical
instruments. One of the posts is pivoted by placing a spring
washer under the head of the screw which holds the post
to the base. A short piece of brass rod fitted with a hard
rubber knob passes through the wire hole in the post. A
piece of No. 30 phosphor bronze wire is soldered to the
end of the rod. By twisting the post and sliding the rod
any portion of the mineral surface may be selected.
Twisting the rod varies the tension of the contact.

The galena detector is connected in the receiving
circuit in the same manner as other detectors of the mineral
type.

THE AUDION.

The Audion
—is finding favor in many amateur wireless
stations, because of its almost entire lack of adjustment
and of the loud clear signals which it gives even when used
for long distance work.

The illustration shows the latest form of audion, the
plate and the grid both being on the same side of the
filament.

The filament of an audion is usually lighted by means of
a six-volt storage battery. A small battery rheostat placed
in series with the battery serves to regulate the amount of
current flowing through the filament. Only one filament
is used at a time, the other being saved as a reserve in case
the first burns out.

Fig. 165. Audion.

The higher voltage necessary to operate an audion is
supplied by a battery consisting of fifteen flashlight
batteries, each flashlight battery being composed of three
separate cells. The batteries are connected to an
eight-point switch so that throwing the switch on the first point
will connect five sets of batteries. The second point
places five more in circuit and each additional point one
set only. It is also a good plan to connect a four-point
switch and three separate cells of battery in series with
the eight-point switch so that they may be added to the
circuit one at a time and the potential varied more closely than
the steps on the eight-point switch permit. The
maximum voltage of such a battery is approximately 56 volts.

The diagram in Fig. 166 shows exactly how an audion
is connected. The wires
A
and
B
are the terminals
leading to the tuning coil or loose coupler. It is not
necessary that the telephone receivers used with an audion be
wound to a high resistance in order to secure good results.

Fig. 166. Audion Circuit.

The audion is placed in operation by turning the rheostat
until the filament lights brightly. Then adjust the
voltage of the high potential battery until the signals are
clearest. If the voltage is too high the audion will become
filled with a bluish light and the voltage should be
immediately reduced. The signals will be loudest when the
filament is brilliantly lighted. No more current should be
passed through the filament than is necessary to render
the signals plain, for if "forced" its life will be limited to
only a few hours.

Fig. 167. Rotary Variable Condenser.

APPENDIX.

[PUBLIC No. 264.]

[S. 6412.]

An Act to Regulate Radio Communication.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the United States of America in Congress assembled.
That a
person, company, or corporation within the jurisdiction of
the United States shall not use or operate any apparatus
for radio communication as a means of commercial
intercourse among the several States, or with foreign nations,
or upon any vessel of the United States engaged in
interstate or foreign commerce, or for the transmission of
radiograms or signals the effect of which extends beyond the
jurisdiction of the State or Territory in which the same are
made, or where interference would be caused thereby with
the receipt of messages or signals from beyond the
jurisdiction of the said State or Territory, except under and
in accordance with a license, revocable for cause, in that
behalf granted by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor
upon application therefor; but nothing in this Act shall
be construed to apply to the transmission and exchange of
radiograms or signals between points situated in the same
State:
Provided
, That the effect thereof shall not extend
beyond the jurisdiction of the said State or interfere with
the reception of radiograms or signals from beyond said
jurisdiction; and a license shall not be required for the
transmission or exchange of radiograms or signals by or on
behalf of the Government of the United States, but every
Government station on land or sea shall have special call
letters designated and published in the list of radio stations
of the United States by the Department of Commerce and
Labor. Any person, company, or corporation that shall
use or operate any apparatus for radio communication in
violation of this section, or knowingly aid or abet another
person, company, or corporation in so doing, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars, and the apparatus or device so unlawfully used and
operated may be adjudged forfeited to the United States.

SEC. 2. That every such license shall be in such form as
the Secretary of Commerce and Labor shall determine and
shall contain the restrictions, pursuant to this Act, on and
subject to which the license is granted; that every such
license shall be issued only to citizens of the United States
or Porto Rico or to a company incorporated under the laws
of some State or Territory or of the United States or Porto
Rico, and shall specify the ownership and location of the
station in which said apparatus shall be used and other
particulars for its identification and to enable its range to
be estimated; shall state the purpose of the station, and,
in case of a station in actual operation at the date of passage
of this Act, shall contain the statement that satisfactory
proof has been furnished that it was actually operating on
the above-mentioned date; shall state the wave length or
the wave lengths authorized for use by the station for the
prevention of interference and the hours for which the
station is licensed for work; and shall not be construed to
authorize the use of any apparatus for radio
communication in any other station than that specified. Every such
license shall be subject to the regulations contained herein,
and such regulations as may be established from time to
time by authority of this Act or subsequent Acts and
treaties of the United States. Every such license shall
provide that the President of the United States in time of
war or public peril or disaster may cause the closing of any
station for radio communication and the removal therefrom
of all radio apparatus, or may authorize the use or control
of any such station or apparatus by any department of the
Government, upon just compensation to the owners.

SEC. 3. That every such apparatus shall at all times
while in use and operation as aforesaid be in charge or
under the supervision of a person or persons licensed for
that purpose by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor.
Every person so licensed who in the operation of any radio
apparatus shall fail to observe and obey regulations
contained in or made pursuant to this Act or subsequent Acts
or treaties of the United States, or any one of them, or who
shall fail to enforce obedience thereto by an unlicensed
person while serving under his supervision, in addition to
the punishments and penalties herein prescribed, may suffer
the suspension of the said license for a period to be fixed
by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor not exceeding
one year. It shall be unlawful to employ any unlicensed
person or for any unlicensed person to serve in charge or in
supervision of the use and operation of such apparatus, and
any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished by
a fine of not more than one hundred dollars or
imprisonment for not more than two months, or both, in the
discretion of the court, for each and every such offense:

Provided
, That in case of emergency the Secretary of
Commerce and Labor may authorize a collector of customs
to issue a temporary permit, in lieu of a license, to the
operator on a vessel subject to the radio ship Act of June
twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and ten.

SEC. 4. That for the purpose of preventing or
minimizing interference with communication between stations in
which such apparatus is operated, to facilitate radio
communication, and to further the prompt receipt of distress
signals, said private and commercial stations shall be subject
to the regulations of this section. These regulations shall
be enforced by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor
through the collectors of customs and other officers of the
Government as other regulations herein provided for.

The Secretary of Commerce and Labor may, in his
discretion, waive the provisions of any or all of these
regulations when no interference of the character above mentioned
can ensue.

The Secretary of Commerce and Labor may grant special
temporary licenses to stations actually engaged in
conducting experiments for the development of the science of
radio communication, or the apparatus pertaining thereto,
to carry on special tests, using any amount of power or any
wave lengths, at such hours and under such conditions as
will insure the least interference with the sending or receipt
of commercial or Government radiograms, of distress signals
and radiograms, or with the work of other stations.

In these regulations the naval and military stations shall
be understood to be stations on land.

REGULATIONS.

NORMAL WAVE LENGTH.

First. Every station shall be required to designate
certain definite wave length as the normal sending and
receiving wave length of the station. This wave length
shall not exceed six hundred meters or it shall exceed one
thousand six hundred meters. Every coastal station open
to general public service shall at all times be ready to
receive messages of such wave lengths as are required by
the Berlin convention. Every ship station, except as
hereinafter provided, and every coast station open to general
public service shall be prepared to use two sending wave
lengths, one of three hundred meters and one of six hundred
meters, as required by the international convention in force:

Provided
, That the Secretary of Commerce and Labor may,
in his discretion, change the limit of wave length reservation
made by regulations first and second to accord with any
international agreement to which the United States is a
party.

OTHER WAVE LENGTHS.

Second. In addition to the normal sending wave
length all stations, except as provided hereinafter in these
regulations, may use other sending wave lengths:

Provided
, That they do not exceed six hundred meters or
that they do exceed one thousand six hundred meters:

Provided further
, That the character of the waves emitted
conforms to the requirements of regulations third and
fourth following.

USE OF A "PURE WAVE"

Third. At all stations if the sending apparatus, to be
referred to hereinafter as the "transmitter," is of such a
character that the energy is radiated in two or more wave
lengths, more or less sharply defined, as indicated by a
sensitive wave meter, the energy in no one of the lesser
waves shall exceed ten per centum of that in the greatest.

USE OF A "SHARP WAVE."

Fourth. At all stations the logarithmic decrement per
complete oscillation in the wave trains emitted by the
transmitter shall not exceed two-tenths, except when
sending distress signals or signals and messages relating thereto.

USE OF "STANDARD DISTRESS WAVE."

Fifth. Every station on shipboard shall be prepared to
send distress calls on the normal wave length designated by
the international convention in force, except on vessels of
small tonnage unable to have plants insuring that wave
length.

SIGNAL OF DISTRESS.

Sixth. The distress call used shall be the international
signal of distress: dot dot dot, dash dash dash, dot dot dot.

USE OF "BROAD INTERFERING WAVE" FOR DISTRESS SIGNALS.

Seventh. When sending distress signals, the transmitter
of a station on shipboard may be tuned in such a manner
as to create a maximum of interference with a maximum
of radiation.

DISTANCE REQUIREMENT FOR DISTRESS SIGNALS.

Eighth. Every station on shipboard, wherever
practicable, shall be prepared to send distress signals of the
character specified in regulations fifth and sixth with
sufficient power to enable them to be received by day over sea
a distance of one hundred nautical miles by a shipboard
station equipped with apparatus for both sending and
receiving equal in all essential particulars to that of the
station first mentioned.

FOR DISTRESS SIGNALS.

Ninth. All stations are required to give absolute priority
to signals and radiograms relating to ships in distress; to
cease all sending on hearing a distress signal; and, except
when engaged in answering or aiding the ship in distress,
to refrain from sending until all signals and radiograms
relating thereto are completed.

REDUCED POWER FOR SHIPS NEAR A GOVERNMENT STATION.

Tenth. No station on shipboard, when within fifteen
nautical miles of a naval or military station, shall use a
transformer input exceeding one kilowatt, nor, when within
five nautical miles of such a station, a transformer input
exceeding one-half kilowatt, except for sending signals of
distress, or signals or radiograms relating thereto.

INTERCOMMUNICATION.

Eleventh. Each shore station open to general public
service between the cost and vessels at sea shall be bound
to exchange radiograms with any similar shore station and
with any ship station without distinction of the radio
systems adopted by such stations, respectively, and each
station on shipboard shall be bound to exchange
radiograms with any other station on shipboard without
distinction of the radio systems adopted by each station
respectively.

It shall be the duty of each such shore station, during the
hours it is in operation, to listen in at intervals of not less
than fifteen minutes and for a period not less than two
minutes, with the receiver tuned to receive messages of
three hundred meter wave lengths.

DIVISION OF TIME.

Twelfth. At important seaports and at all other places
where naval or military and private or commercial shore
stations operate in such close proximity that interference
with the work of naval and military stations can not be
avoided by the enforcement of the regulations contained
in the foregoing regulations concerning wave lengths and
character of signals emitted, such private or commercial
shore stations as do interfere with the reception of signals
by the naval and military stations concerned shall not use
their transmitters during the first fifteen minutes of each
hour, local standard time. The Secretary of Commerce
and Labor may, on the recommendation of the department
concerned, designate the station or stations which may be
required to observe this division of time.

GOVERNMENT STATIONS TO OBSERVE DIVISION OF TIME.

Thirteenth. The naval or military stations for which
the above mentioned division of time may be established
shall transmit signals or radiograms only during the first
fifteen minutes of each hour, local standard time, except
in case of signals or radiograms relating to vessels in distress,
as hereinbefore provided.

USE OF UNNECESSARY POWER.

Fourteenth. In all circumstances, except in case of
signals or radiograms relating to vessels in distress, all
stations shall use the minimum amount of energy necessary
to carry out any communication desired.

GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVATE STATIONS.

Fifteenth. No private or commercial station not engaged
in the transaction of bona fide commercial business by radio
communication or in experimentation in connection with
the development and manufacture of radio apparatus for
commercial purposes shall use a transmitting wave length
exceeding two hundred meters, or a transformer input
exceeding one kilowatt, except by special authority of the
Secretary of Commerce and Labor contained in the license
of the station:
Provided
, That the owner or operator of a
station of the character mentioned in this regulation shall
not be liable for a violation of the requirements of the third
or fourth regulations to the penalties of one hundred dollars
or twenty-five dollars, respectively, provided in this section
unless the person maintaining or operating such station
shall have been notified in writing that the said transmitter
has been found, upon tests conducted by the Government,
to be so adjusted as to violate the said third and fourth
regulations, and opportunity has been given to said owner
or operator to adjust said transmitter in conformity with
said regulations.

SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS IN THE VICINITIES OF GOVERNMENT STATIONS.

Sixteenth. No station of the character mentioned in
regulation fifteenth situated within five nautical miles of
a naval or military station shall use a transmitting wave
length exceeding two hundred meters or a transformer input
exceeding one-half kilowatt.

SHIP STATIONS TO COMMUNICATE WITH NEAREST SHORE STATIONS.

Seventeenth. In general, the shipboard stations shall
transmit their radiograms to the nearest shore station. A
sender on board a vessel shall, however, have the right to
designate the shore station through which he desires to
have his radiograms transmitted. If this can not be done,
the wishes of the sender are to be complied with only if the
transmission can be effected without interfering with the
service of other stations.

LIMITATIONS FOR FUTURE INSTALLATIONS IN VICINITIES OF GOVERNMENT STATIONS.

Eighteenth. No station on shore not in actual operation
at the date of the passage of this Act shall be licensed for
the transaction of commercial business by radio
communication within fifteen nautical miles of the following naval
or military stations, to wit: Arlington, Virginia; Key West,
Florida; San Juan, Porto Rico; North Head and Tatoosh
Island, Washington; San Diego, California; and those
established or which may be established in Alaska and in
the Canal Zone; and the head of the department having
control of such Government stations shall, so far as is
consistent with the transaction of governmental business,
arrange for the transmission and receipt of commercial
radiograms under the provisions of the Berlin convention
of nineteen hundred and six and future international
conventions or treaties to which the United States may be a
party, at each of the stations above referred to, and shall
fix the rates therefor, subject to control of such rates by
Congress. At such stations and wherever and whenever
shore stations open for general public business between the
coast and vessels at sea under the provisions of the Berlin
convention of nineteen hundred and six and future
international conventions and treaties to which the United
States may be a party shall not be so established as to insure
a constant service day and night without interruption, and
in all localities wherever or whenever such service shall not
be maintained by a commercial shore station within one
hundred nautical miles of a naval radio station, the
Secretary of the Navy shall, so far as is consistent with the
transaction of governmental business, open naval radio stations
to the general public business described above, and shall
fix rates for such service, subject to control of such rates by
Congress. The receipts from such radiograms shall be
covered into the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.

SECRECY OF MESSAGES.

Nineteenth. No person or persons engaged in or having
knowledge of the operation of any station or stations shall
divulge or publish the contents of any messages transmitted
or received by such station, except to the person or persons
to whom the same may be directed, or their authorized
agent, or to another station employed to forward such
message to its destination, unless legally required so to do
by the court of competent jurisdiction or other competent
authority. Any person guilty of divulging or publishing
any message, except as herein provided, shall, on conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than two
hundred and fifty dollars or imprisonment for a period of
not exceeding three months, or both fine and imprisonment,
in the discretion of the court.

PENALTIES.

For violation of any of these regulations, subject to which
a license under sections one and two of this Act may be
issued, the owner of the apparatus shall be liable to a
penalty of one hundred dollars, which may be reduced or
remitted by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor, and
for repeated violations of any of such regulations, the
license may be revoked.

For violation of any of these regulations, except as
provided in regulation nineteenth, subject to which a license
under section three of this Act may be issued, the operator
shall be subject to a penalty of twenty-five dollars, which
may be reduced or remitted by the Secretary of Commerce
and Labor, and for repeated violations of any such
regulations, the license shall be suspended or revoked.

SEC. 5. That every license granted under the provisions
of this Act for the operation or use of apparatus for radio
communication shall prescribe that the operator thereof
shall not wilfully or maliciously interfere with any other
radio communication. Such interference shall be deemed
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof the owner or
operator, or both, shall be punishable by a fine of not to
exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to
exceed one year, or both.

SEC. 6. That the expression "radio communication" as
used in this Act means any system of electrical
communication by telegraphy or telephony without the aid of any wire
connecting the points from and at which the radiograms,
signals, or other communications are sent or received.

SEC. 7. That a person, company, or corporation within
the jurisdiction of the United States shall not knowingly
utter or transmit, or cause to be uttered or transmitted, any
false or fraudulent distress signal or call or false or
fraudulent signal, call, or other radiogram of any kind. The
penalty for so uttering or transmitting a false or fraudulent
distress signal or call shall be a fine of not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more
than five years, or both, in the discretion of the court, for
each and every such offense, and the penalty for so uttering
or transmitting, or causing to be uttered or transmitted,
any other false or fraudulent signal, call, or other radiogram
shall be a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or
imprisonment for not more than two years, or both, in the
discretion of the court, for each and every such offense.

SEC. 8. That a person, company, or corporation shall
not use or operate any apparatus for radio communication
on a foreign ship in territorial waters of the United States
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of sections
four and seven of this Act and so much of section five as
imposes a penalty for interference. Save as aforesaid,
nothing in this Act shall apply to apparatus for radio
communication on any foreign ship.

SEC. 9. That the trial of any offense under this Act shall
be in the district in which it is committed, or if the offense
is committed upon the high seas or out of the jurisdiction
of any particular State or district the trial shall be in the
district where the offender may be found or into which he
shall be first brought.

SEC. 10. That this Act shall not apply to the Phillippine
Islands.

SEC. 11. That this Act shall take effect and be in force
on and after four months from its passage.

Approved, August 13, 1912.

LIST OF WORKS

ON

ELECTRICAL SCIENCE

PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE BY

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY,

25 Park Place, New York.

ABBOTT, A. V. The Electrical Transmission of Energy.

A Manual for the Design of Electrical Circuits.
Fifth Edition, enlarged and rewritten.

With many Diagrams, Engravings and Folding Plates. 8vo., cloth,
675 pp Net, $5.00

ARNOLD, E. Armature Windings of Direct-Current Dynamos.

Extension and Application of a general Winding Rule. Translated from
the original German by Francis B. DeCress. Illustrated. 8vo.
cloth, 124 pp $2.00

ASHE, S. W. Electricity Experimentally and Practically Applied.

Second Edition.
422 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 375 pp. Net, $2.00

ASHE, S. W., and KEILEY, J. D. Electric Railways Theoretically and Practically Treated.

Illustrated. 12mo., cloth.

Vol. I. Rolling Stock.

Second Edition.
285 pp Net, $2.50

Vol. II. Substations and Distributing Systems.

296 pp Net, $2. 50

ATKINSON, A. A. Electrical and Magnetic Calculations.

For the use of Electrical Engineers and others interested in the Theory and
Application of Electricity and Magnetism.
Fourth Edition
, revised
Illustrated. 12mo, cloth, 310 pp Net, $1.50

ATKINSON, PHILIP. The Elements of Dynamic Electricity and Magnetism.

Fourth Edition.
Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 405 pp. $2.00

Elements of Electric Lighting,
including Electric Generation, Measurement, Storage, and Distribution.
Tenth Edition
, fully revised and new matter added. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 280 pp $1.50

Power Transmitted by Electricity and Applied by the Electric Motor,
including Electric Railway Construction. Illustrated.
Fourth Edition
, fully revised and new matter added. 12mo., cloth, 241 pp. $2.00

AUSTIN, E. Single-Phase Electric Railways.

346 illustrations
8 x 11, cloth, 308 pp Net, $5.00

AYRTON, HERTHA. The Electric Arc.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 479 pp Net, $5.00

BAKER, J. T. The Telegraphic Transmission of Photographs.

63 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 155 pp Net, $1.25

BARHAM, G. B. Development of the Incandescent Electric Lamp.

25 illustrations, 2 plates, 5 x 8 cloth. 206 pp $2.00

BEDELL, FREDERICK. Direct and Alternating Current Manual.

With directions for testing and a discussion of the theory of
electrical apparatus.
Second Edition, greatly enlarged
. Assisted by C. A.
Pierce. Illustrated. 6 x 9, cloth, 373 pp Net, $2.00

BLAINE, ROBERT G. The Calculus and Its Applications.

A practical treatise for beginners especially engineering students. 79
illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 330 pp Net, $1.50

BONNEY, G. E. The Electro-Plater's Hand Book.

A Manual for Amateurs and Young Students of Electro-Metallurgy.
Fifth Edition,
enlarged.
61 Illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 208 pp $1.20

BOTTONE, S. R. Magnetos For Automobilists; How Made and How Used

A handbook of practical instruction on the manufacture and
adaptation of the magneto to the needs of the motorist.
Second Edition,
enlarged
. 52 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 118 pp Net, $1.00

BROADFOOT, S. K. Motors, Secondary Batteries and Accessory Apparatus.

16 illustrations. 16mo., cloth. 100pp. (Installation Manuals
Series) Net, 0.75

BROUGHTON, H. H. Electric Canes.

Their design, construction and application. 600 illustrations and plates. 120 tables, 6 x 9, cloth,
848 pp Net, $9.00

CHILD, C. D. Electric Arcs.

Experiments upon arcs between different
electrodes in various environments and their explanation. 58
illustrations. 5 x 7, cloth, 203 pp Net, $2.00

COLLIS, A. G. High and Low Tension Switchgear Design.

94 illustrations and folding plates, 6 x 9, cloth, 233 pp Net, $3.50

Switchgear and The Control of Electric Circuits.
47 illustrations. 4 1/2 x 6 1/2, cloth, 85 pp. (Installation Manuals Series) Net, 0.50

COMSTOCK, D. F., and TROLAND, L. T. The Nature of Matter and Electricity.

An outline of modern views. Illustrated. 5 x 7,
cloth, 200 pp Net, $2.00

COOPER, W. R. Primary Batteries: their Theory, Construction, and Use

New Edition in Press

CRAIG, J. W., and WOODWARD, W. P. Questions and Answers About Electrical Apparatus.

Third edition revised and enlarged. Illustrated.
4 x 6 Leather, 256 pp Net, $1.50

CRAMP, W. Continuous Current Machine Design.

137 illustration.
8vo., cloth, 240 pp Net, $2.50

CREED Y, F. Single-Phase Commutator Motors.

98 illustrations, 6 x 9,
cloth, 120 pp Net, $2.00

CROCKER, F. B. Electric Lighting.

A Practical Exposition of the Art
for the use of Electricians, Students, and others interested in the
Installation or Operation of Electric Lighting Plants.

Vol. I. The Generating Plant
.
Seventh Edition, entirely revised
. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 482 pp $3.00

Vol. II. Distributing System and Lamps.

Sixth Edition
. Illustrated 8vo., cloth, 505 pp.

CROCKER, F. B., and ARENDT, M. Electric Motors: Their Action, Control, and Application.

Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged
.
169 illustrations. 6 1/4 x 9 1/4, cloth, 315 pp Net, $2.50

CROCKER, F. B., and WHEELER, S. S. The Management of Electrical Machinery.

Being a
thoroughly revised and rewritten edition
of the
authors' "Practical Management of Dynamos and Motors."

Eighth Edition.
Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 232 pp Net, $1.00

CUSHING, H. C., Jr. Standard Wiring for Electric Light and Power

Illustrated. 16mo., leather, 156 pp $1.00

CUSHING, H. C., Jr. and HARRISON, N. Central Station Management.

5 1/2 x 7 1/4 cloth, 417 pp Net, $2.00

DAVIES, F. H. Electric Power and Traction.
Illustrated. 8vo., cloth

293 pp. (Van Nostrand's Westminster Series.) Net, $2.00

Foundations and Machinery Fixing.
52 illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 146 pp. (Installations Manuals Series) Net, $1.00

DEL MAR, W. A. Electric Power Conductors.

Second edition revised.

69 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 8, cloth, 330 pp Net, $2.00

DEVEY, R. G. Mill and Factory Wiring.

126 illustrations. 16mo.,
cloth, 209 pp. (Installation Manuals Series) Net, $1.00

DINGER, Lieut. H. C. Handbook for the Care and Operation of Naval Machinery.

Second Edition.
124 Illustrations. 16mo., cloth,
302 pp Net, $2.00

DUNCAN, W. G. and PENMAN, D. Electrical Equipment of Collieries.

157 illustrations, 6 1/2 x 8 3/4, cloth, 329 pp Net, $4.00

DWIGHT, H. B. Transmission Line Formulas for Electrical Engineers and Engineering Students.

27 illustrations. 2 folding plates, 12mo,
cloth, 143 pp Net, $2.00

DYNAMIC ELECTRICITY:

Its Modern Use and Measurement, chiefly
in its application to Electric Lighting and Telegraphy, including:
1. Some Points in Electric Lighting, by Dr. John Hopkinson. 2. On
the Treatment of Electricity for Commercial Purposes, by J. N.
Shoolbred. 3. Electric-Light Arithmetic, by R. E. Day, M.E.
Fourth Edition.

Illustrated. 16mo., boards, 166 pp. (No. 71 Van
Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

ECK, J. Light, Radiation and Illumination.

Translated from the German
of Paul Hogner. 59 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 8, cloth, 100 pp. Net, $2.50

ECCLES, W. H. Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony.

Illustrated. 5 x 8 1/2
half leather, 418 pp Net, $4.50

EDDY, L. C. Laboratory Manual of Alternating Currents.

21 illustrations, 5 1/2 x 8, cloth, 26 pp Net, 50 cents

EDLER, R. Switches and Switchgear.

Translated by Ph. Laubach.
335 illustrations. 6 1/2 x 9, cloth, 412 pp Net, $4.00

EDGCUMBE, K. Industrial Electrical Measuring Instruments.

Illustrated. 8 vo., cloth, 227 pp.

ENGINEERING AS A CAREER.

By Prominent Engineers. Edited by
C. E. Drayer and F. H. Newell. 5 1/4 x 7 1/2, 226 pp. Paper 75 cents,
cloth $1.00

EWING, J. A. Magnetic Induction in Iron and other Metals.

Third Edition, revised
. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 393 pp Net, $4.00

FISHER, H. K. C., and DARBY, W. C. Students' Guide to Submarine Cable Testing.

Fourth Edition, enlarged.
Illustrated. 8vo., cloth,
252 pp Net, $3.50

FLEMING, J. A., Prof. The Alternate-Current Transformer in Theory and Practice.

Vol. I.: The Induction of Electric Currents.

Fifth Issue.
Illustrated.
5vo., cloth, 641 pp: Net, $5.00

Vol. II.: The Utilization of Induced Currents.

Third Issue.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 587 pp Net, $5.00

Propagation of Electric Currents in Telephone and Telegraph Conductors.
Illustrated. 6 1/2 x 9 1/2, cloth, 323 pp Net, $3.00

Handbook for the Electrical Laboratory and Testing Room.
Two Volumes. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 1160 pp. Each vol Net, $5.00

FOSTER, H. A. With the Collaboration of Eminent Specialists. Electrical Engineers' Pocket Book.

A handbook of useful data for
Electricians and Electrical Engineers. With innumerable Tables,
Diagrams, and Figures. The most complete book of its kind ever
published, treating of the latest and best Practice in Electrical
Engineering.
Seventh Edition, completely revised and enlarged.
Fully Illustrated.
Pocket Size. Leather. Thumb Indexed. 1636 pp $5.00

Engineering Valuation of Public Utilities and Factories.
50 blank forms. 6 x 9, cloth, 361 pp Net, $3.00

Electrical Cost Data, Estimates and Working Tables.

In Press

FOWLE, F. F. The Protection of Railroads from Overhead Transmission Line Crossings.

35 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 76 pp Net, $1.50.

FREUDEMACHER, P. W. Electrical Mining Installations.

36 illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 192 pp. (Installation Manuals Series) Net, $1.00

FRITH, J. Alternating Current Design.

27 illustrations. 6 x 9, cloth, 131 pp Net, $2.00

GARRARD, C. C. Electric Switch and Controlling Gear.

423 illustrations, 5 3/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 656 pp Net, $6.00

GANT, L. W. Elements of Electric Traction for Motormen and Others.

Illustrated with Diagrams. 8vo., cloth, 217 pp Net, $2.00

GEAR, H. B. and WILLIAMS, P. F. Electric Central Station Distribution Systems. Their Design and Construction.

Second Edition, revised and enlarged
. 187 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 7 1/2, cloth, 455 pp Net, 3.50

GERHARDI, C. H. W. Electricity Meters; their Construction and Management.

A practical manual for engineers and students.
Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 337 pp Net, $4.00

GOLDSMITH, RUDOLF. The Alternating Current Commutator Motor. The Leakage of Induction Motors.

In one volume. 247 illustrations. 5 1/4 x 8 3/4, cloth Net, $3.00

GORE, GEORGE. The Art of Electrolytic Separation of Metals (Theoretical and Practical).

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 295 pp Net $3.50

GROTH, L. A. Welding and Cutting Metals by Aid of Gases or Electricity.

124 illustrations. 8 vo., cloth, 280 pp. (Van Nostrand's
Westminister Series) Net, $2.00

HALLER, G. F. and CUNNINGHAM, E. T. The Tesla High Frequency Coil; its construction and uses.

12mo., cloth, 56 illustrations, 130 pp Net, $1.25

HASKINS, C. H. The Galvanometer and its Uses. A Manual for Electricians and Students.

Fifth Edition, revised
. Illustrated. 16mo., morocco, 75 pp $1.50

HAUSMANN, E. Telegraph Engineering. A Manual for Practicing Telegraph, Engineers and Engineering Students.

192 Illustrations. cloth, 416 pp Net, $3.00

HAY, ALFRED. An Introductory Course of Continuous-Current Engineering.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 327 pp Net, $2.50

HAYES, H. V. Public Utilities, Their Cost New and Depreciation.

5 3/4 x 8 1/2, cloth, 275 pp Net, $2.00

Public Utilities; Their Fair Present Value and Return.
5 1/2 x 8 1/2, cloth, 200 pp Net, $2.00

HEATHER, H. J. Electrical Engineering for Mechanical and Mining Engineers.

183 illustrations. 5 x 8, cloth, 344 pp Net, $3.50

HEAVISIDE, O. Electromagnetic Theory. Two Volumes with Many Diagrams.

8vo., cloth, 1006 pp. Each Vol Net, $5.00

Vol. III.
529 pp Net, $7.50

HOBART, H. M. Heavy Electrical Engineering.

Illustrated. 8vo.,
cloth, 338 pp Net, $4.50

Design of Static Transformers.
101 illustrations. 6 x 9, cloth, 189 pp Net, $2.00

Electricity. A text-book designed in particular for engineering students.
115 illustrations. 43 tables. 8vo.. cloth, 266 pp, Net, $2.00

Electric Trains.
88 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 220 pp Net, $2.50

Electric Propulsion of Ships.
44 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 167 pp. Net, $2.00

HOBBS, W. R. P. The Arithmetic of Electrical Measurements.

With numerous examples, fully worked.
Sixteenth Edition, revised and
edited with six additional chapters by A. R. Palmer.
12mo. cloth,
126 pp 50 cents.

HOUSTOUN, R. A. Studies in Light Production.

22 illustrations.
5 3/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 120 pp Net, $2.00

HUTCHINSON, R. W., Jr. Long-Distance Electric Power Transmission:

Being a Treatise on the Hydro-Electric Generation of Energy; Its
Transformation, Transmission, and Distribution.
Second Edition.

Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 350 pp Net, $3.00

and THOMAS, W. D. Electricity in Mining.
Being a theoretical and practical treatise on the construction, operation and maintenance of electrical mining machinery. 12mo., cloth
In Press

INCANDESCENT ELECTRIC LIGHTING.

A Practical Description of
the Edison System, by H. Latimer. To which is added: The Design
and Operation of Incandescent Stations, by C. J. Field;
A Description of the Edison Electrolyte Meter, by A. E. Kennelly; and a
Paper on the Maximum Efficiency of Incandescent Lamps, by T. W.
Howell.
Fifth Edition.
Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 140 pp. (No.
57 Van Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

INDUCTION COILS: How Made and How Used.

Eleventh Edition
. Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 123 pp. (No. 53 Van Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

JEHL, FRANCIS. The Manufacture of Carbons for Electric Lighting and other purposes.

Illustrated with numerous Diagrams, Tables,
and Folding Plates. 8vo., cloth, 232 pp Net, $4.00

JOHNSON, J. H. Arc Lamps and Accessory Apparatus.

20 illustrations.
16mo., cloth, 135 pp. (Installation Manuals Series) Net, 75 cents.

JOHNSON, T. M. Ship Wiring and Fitting.

47 illustrations. 16mo.,
cloth, 92 pp. (Installation Manuals Series) Net, 75 cents.

JONES, HARRY C. The Electrical Nature of Matter and Radioactivity.

Third Edition, revised.
5 1/2 x 8 1/2, cloth, 218 pp Net, $2.00

KAPP, GISBERT. Alternate-Current Machinery.

Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 190 pp. (No. 96 Van Nostrand's Science Series) 50 cents

KAPPER, F. Overhead Transmission Lines and Distributing Circuits.

297 illustrations. 2 plates, 7 1/4 x 10, cloth, 310 pp Net, $4.00

KENNEDY, R. Electrical Installations of Electric Light, Power, and Traction Machinery.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 5 vols. The set $15.00. Each $3.50

KENNELLY, A. E. Theoretical Elements of Electro-Dynamic Machinery.

Vol. I. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 90 pp $1.50

KERSHAW, J. B. C. The Electric Furnace in Iron and Steel Production.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 74 pp Net, $1.50

Electrometallurgy.
Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 303 pp. (Van Nostrand's Westminster Series.) Net, $2.00

KINZBRUNNER, C. Continuous-Current Armatures; their Winding and Construction.

79 Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 80 pp Net, $1.50

Alternate-Current Windings; their Theory and Construction.
89 Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 80 pp Net, $1.50

The Testing of Alternating Current Machines in Laboratories and Test Rooms.
A practical work for students and engineers. Vol I. General Tests; Transformers, Alternators. 141 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 8 3/4, cloth, 164 pp Net, $2.00

KLINGENBERG, G. Large Electric Power Stations.

Their design and construction, with examples of existing stations. 180 illustrations, 7 plates, 7 x 10, cloth, 260 pp Net, $5.00

KOESTER, F. Hydroelectric Developments and Engineering.

A practical and theoretical treatise on the development, design, construction,
equipment and operation of hydroelectric transmission plants.

Second Edition
. 500 illustrations. 4to., cloth, 475 pp. Net, $5.00

Steam-Electric Power Plants.
A practical treatise on the design of central light and power stations and their economical construction and operation. Second Edition. Fully Illustrated. 4to., cloth 455 pp Net, $5.00

LANCASTER, M. Electric Cooking, Heating and Cleaning.

Edited by W. E. Lancaster, American Edition by S. L. Coles, 305 illustrations, 6 x 8 1/2, cloth 340 pp Net, $1.00

LARNER, E. T. The Principles of Alternating Currents for Students of Electrical Engineering.

Illustrated with Diagrams. 12mo., cloth,
144 pp Net, $1.25

LEMSTROM, S. Electricity in Agriculture and Horticulture.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth Net, $1.50

LIVERMORE, V. P., and WILLIAMS, J. How to Become a Competent Motorman:

Being a practical treatise on the proper method of
operating a street-railway motor-car; also giving details how to
overcome certain defects. Second Edition. Illustrated. 16mo., cloth,
247 pp Net, $1.00

LIVINGSTONE, R. Mechanical Design and Construction of Generators.

122 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 8 3/4, cloth, 228 pp Net, $3.50

Mechanical Design and Construction of Commutators.
62 illustrations, 5 1/2 x 8 3/4, cloth, 93 pp Net, $2.25

LOCKWOOD, T. D. Electricity, Magnetism, and Electro-Telegraphy.

A Practical Guide and Handbook of General Information for
Electrical Students, Operators, and Inspectors.
Fourth Edition.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 374 pp $2.50

LODGE, OLIVER J. Signalling Across Space Without Wires:

Being a description of the work of Hertz and his successors.
Third Edition

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth Net, $2.00

LORING, A. E. A Handbook of the Electro-Magnetic Telegraph

Fourth Edition, revised.
Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 116 pp. (No.
39 Van Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

LUCKTESH, M. Color and Its Application.

126 illustrations, 4 color plates. 6 x 9, cloth, 350 pp $3.00

Light and Shade and Their Applications.
135 illustrations, 10 tables, 6 1/4 x 9 1/4, cloth, 278 pp Net, $2.50

MALCOLM, W. H. Theory of the Submarine Telegraph Cable.

In Press

MANSFIELD, A. N. Electromagnets: Their Design and Construction.

Second Edition.
Illustrated. 16mo M cloth, 155 pp. (No. 64 Van
Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

Manufacture of Electric Light Carbons.
Illustrated. 5 1/2 x 8, cloth. Net, $1.00

MASSIE, W. W., and UNDERBILL, C. R. Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony Popularly Explained.

With a chapter by Nikola Tesla. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 82 pp Net, $1.00

MAURICE, W. Electrical Blasting Apparatus and Explosives, with special reference to colliery practice.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth. 167 pp Net, 3.50

The Shot Firer's Guide.
A practical manual on blasting and the prevention of blasting accidents. 78 illustrations. 8vo., cloth. 212 pp Net, $1.50

MIESSNER, B. F. Radiodynamics.

The wireless control of torpedoes
and other mechanisms. 112 illustrations, 5 1/2 x 8 1/4, cloth, 211 pp. Net, $2.00

MONCKTON, C. C. F. Radio Telegraphy.

173 Illustrations. 8vo
cloth, 272 pp. (Van Nostrand's Westminster Series.) Net, $2.00

MONTGOMERY, J. W. Electric Wiring Specifications

4 x 6 1/2, cloth, 107 pp Net, $1.50

MORECROFT, J. H. and HEHRE, F. W. A Short Course in Testing of Electrical Machinery.

Third Edition.
Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 160 pp Net, 1.50

MORGAN, ALFRED P. Wireless Telegraph Construction for Amateurs.

Third Edition.
167 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 7 1/2, cloth, 236 pp Net, $1.50

NERZ, F. Searchlights, Their Theory, Construction and Application.

Translated by C. Rodgers. 47 illustrations. 6 x 8,, cloth, 145 pp. Net, $3.00

NIPHER, FRANCIS E. Theory of Magnetic Measurements.

With an Appendix on the Method of Least Squares. Illustrated. 12mo.,
cloth, 94 pp $1.00

OHM, G. S. The Galvanic Circuit Investigated Mathematically.

Berlin, 1827. Translated by William Francis. With Preface and Notes
by Thos. D. Lockwood.
Second Edition.
Illustrated. 16mo., cloth,
269 pp. (No. 102 Van Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

OLSSON, ANDREW. Motor Control as used in Connection with Turret Turning and Gun Elevating.

(The Ward Leonard System.) 13 illustrations. 12mo., paper, 27 pp. (U. S. Navy Electrical Series
No. 1.) Net, .50

OUDIN, MAURICE A. Standard Polyphase Apparatus and Systems.

Sixth Edition, revised.
Illustrated with many Photo-reproductions,
Diagrams, and Tables. 8vo., cloth, 369 pp Net, $3.00

PALAZ, A. Treatise on Industrial Photometry.
Specially applied to

Electric Lighting. Translated from the French by G. W. Patterson,
Jr., and M. R. Patterson.
Second Edition.
Fully Illustrated.
8vo., cloth, 324 pp $4.00

PARR, G. D. A. Electrical Engineering Measuring Instruments for Commercial and Laboratory Purposes.

With 370 Diagrams and Engravings. 8vo., cloth, 328 pp Net, $3.50

PARSHALL, H. P., and HOBART, H. M. Armature Windings of Electric Machines.

Third Edition.
With 140 full-page Plates, 65 Tables, and 165 pages of descriptive letter-press. 4vo., cloth, 300 pp. $7.50

Electric Railway Engineering.
With 437 Figures and Diagrams and many Tables. 4to., cloth, 475 pp Net, $7.50

Electric Machine Design.
Being a revised and enlarged edition of "Electric Generators." 648 Illustrations. 4vo., half morocco, 601 pp Net, $12.50

PATCHELL W. H. Application of Electric Power to Mines and heavy Industries.

91 illustrations 6 1/2 x 9 1/4, cloth, 203 pp Net, 4.00

PATTERSON, G. W. L. Wiring Calculations for Light and Power Installations.

139 illustrations, 5 1/4 x 7 1/4. cloth, 203 pp Net, $2.00

Electric Mine Signalling and Installations.
Illustrated. 5 1/4 x 7 1/8, 110 pp Net, $1.50

PERRINE, F. A. C. Conductors for Electrical Distribution: Their Manufacture and Materials the Calculation of Circuits, Pole Line Construction, Underground Working, and other Uses.

Second Edition.
Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 287 pp Net, $3.50

POPE, F. L. Modern Practice of the Electric Telegraph.

A Handbook for Electricians and Operators.
Seventeenth Edition
. Illustrated.
8vo., cloth, 234 pp $1.50

RAPHAEL, F. C. Localization of Faults in Electric Light Mains.

Third Edition In Press

RASCH, E. Electric Arc Phenomena.
Translated by K. Tornberg.

52 illustrations. 5 x 7, cloth, 187pp Net, $2.00

RAYMOND, E. B. Alternating-Current Engineering, Practically Treated.

Third Edition, revised
. With many Figures and Diagrams. 8vo.,
cloth, 244 pp Net, $2.50

REDFERN, T. B. and SAVIN, J. Bells, Indicators, Telephones, Fire and Burglar Alarms.

85 illustrations. 4 1/2 x 6 3/4, cloth, 123 pp. (Installation Manuals Series) .50

RICHARDSON, S. S. Magnetism and Electricity and the Principles of Electrical Measurement.

Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 596 pp. Net, $2.00

ROBERTS, J. Laboratory Work in Electrical Engineering—Preliminary Grade.

A series of laboratory experiments for first and
second-year students in electrical engineering. Illustrated with many
Diagrams. 8vo., cloth, 218 pp Net, $2.00

ROLLINS, W. Notes on X-Light.

Printed on deckle edge Japan paper
400 pp. of text, 152 full-page plates. 8vo., cloth Net, $5.00

RUHMER, ERNST. Wireless Telephony in Theory and Practice.

Translated from the German by James Erskine-Murray. Illustrated.
5vo., cloth, 224 pp Net, $3.50

RUSSELL, A. The Theory of Electric Cables and Networks.

71 Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 275 pp Net, $3.00

SAYERS, H. M. Brakes for Tramway Cars.

6 x 9, cloth, 76 pp. Net, 1.25

SEVER, G. F. Electrical Engineering Experiments and Tests on Direct-Current Machinery.

Second Edition, enlarged
. With Diagrams and Figures. 8vo., pamphlet, 75 pp Net, $1.00

SEVER, G. F., and TOWNSEND, F. Laboratory and Factory Tests in Electrical Engineering.

Second Edition, revised and enlarged.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 269 pp Net, $2.50

SEWALL, C. H. Wireless Telegraphy. With Diagrams and Figures.

Second Edition, corrected
. Illustrated . 8vo., cloth, 229 pp Net, $2.00

Lessons in Telegraphy.
Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 104 pp Net, $1.00

SEWELL, T The Construction of Dynamos (Alternating and Direct Current).

A Text-book for students, engineering contractors, and
electricians-in-charge. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 316 pp $3.00

SHELDON, S., and HAUSMANN, E Dynamo-Electric Machinery: Its Construction, Design, and Operation.

Vol.1.: Direct-Current Machines.

Ninth Edition, completely re-written.

Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 281 pp Net, $2.50

Vol. II.: Alternating-Current Machines:

Tenth Edition, rewritten.
cloth, 353 pp Net, $2.50

Electric Traction and Transmission Engineering
127 illustration. 12mo., cloth, 317 pp Net, $2.50

SLOANE, T. O'CONOR. Elementary Electrical Calculations.

A Manual of Simple Engineering Mathematics, covering the whole field of
Direct Current Calculations, the basis of Alternating Current
Mathematics, Networks, and typical cases of Circuits, with
Appendices on special subjects. 8vo., cloth. Illustrated. 304 pp
Net, $2.00

SMITH, C. F. Practical Alternating Currents, and Alternating Current Testing.

Third Edition.
236 illustrations. 5 3/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 476 pp.
Net $2.60

SMITH, C. F. Practical Testing of Dynamos and Motors.

Third Edition
, 108 illustrations. 5 1/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 322 pp Net, $2.00

SNELL, ALBION T. Electric Motive Power.

The Transmission and Distribution of Electric Power by Continuous and Alternating Currents.
With a Section on the Applications of Electricity to Mining Work.

Second Edition
. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 411 pp Net, $4.00

SODDY, F. Radio-Activity; an Elementary Treatise from the Standpoint of the Disintegration Theory.

Fully Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 214 pp Net, $3.00

SOLOMON, MAURICE. Electric Lamps.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth. (Van Nostrand's Westminster Series.) Net, $2.00

SWINBURNE, JAS., and WORDINGHAM, C. H. The Measurement of Electric Currents. Electrical Measuring Instruments. Meters for Electrical Energy.

Edited, with Preface, by T. Commerford Martin.
Folding Plate and Numerous Illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 241 pp.
(No. 109 Van Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

SWOOPE, C. WALTON. Lessons in Practical Electricity: Principle Experiments, and Arithmetical Problems. An Elementary Textbook.

With numerous Tables, Formulae, and two large Instruction
Plates.
Fifteenth Edition, revised
. Illustrated. 5vo., cloth, 462 pp Net, $2.00

THIESS, J. B. and JOY, G. A. Toll Telephone Practice.

273 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 433 pp Net, $3.50

THOM, C., and JONES, W. H. Telegraphic Connections, embracing recent methods in Quadruplex Telegraphy.

20 Colored Plates. 8vo., cloth, 59 pp $1.50

THOMPSON, S. P., Prof. Dynamo-Electric Machinery.

With an Introduction and Notes by Frank L. Pope and H. R. Butler.
Illustrated 16vo., cloth, 214 pp. (No. 66 Van Nostrand's Science
Series.) 50 cents

Recent Progress in Dynamo-Electric Machines.

Being a Supplement to "Dynamo-Electric Machinery." Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 113 pp. (No. 75 Van Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents

TOWNSEND, FITZHUGH. Alternating Current Engineering.

Illustrated. 8vo, paper, 32 pp Net, 75 cents

UNDERBILL, C. R. Solenoids, Electromagnets and Electromagnetic Windings.

Second Edition
. 218 Illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 345 pp Net, $2.00

URQUHART, J. W. Electroplating.

Fifth Edition
. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 230 pp $2.00

Electrotyping.
Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 228 pp $2.00

VOSMAER, A. Ozone.
Its Manufacture and Uses.

76 illustrations. 6 x 9, cloth, 210 pp Net, $2.50

WADE, E. J. Secondary Batteries: Their Theory, Construction, and Use.

Second Edition, corrected
265 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 501 pp.
Net, $4.00

WADSWORTH, C. Primary Battery Ignition.

A simple practical pocket guide on the construction, operation, maintenance, and testing of
primary batteries for automobile, motorboat, and stationary
engine ignition service. 26 illustrations. 5 x 7, cloth, 79 pp Net, 0.50

WALKER, FREDERICK. Practical Dynamo Building for Amateurs. How to Wind for any Output.

Third Edition
. Illustrated. 16mo.,
cloth, 104 pp. (No. 68 Van Nostrand's Science Series.) 50 cents.

Electricity in Mining.
Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 385 pp $.50

WATT, ALEXANDER. Electroplating and Refining of Metals

New Edition
, rewritten by Arnold Philip. Illustrated 8vo., cloth, 704
pp Net, $4.50

Electro-metallurgy

Fifteenth Edition
. Illustrated 12mo., cloth,
225 pp $1.00

WEBB, H. L. A Practical Guide to the Testing of Insulated Wires and Cables

Sixth Edition
. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth., 118pp $1.00

WILKINSON, H. D. Submarine Cable-Laying, Repairing, and Testing.

Second Edition, completely revised
. 313 illustrations. 8vo., cloth,
580 pp Net, $6.00

WILSON, J. F. Essentials of Electrical Engineering.

300 illustrations.
6 x 9, cloth, 355 pp Net, $2.50

WRIGHT, J. Testing, Fault Localization and General Hints for Linemen.

19 Illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 88 pp. (Installation Serious Manuals.)
Net, 50 cents.

YOUNG, J. ELTON. Electrical Testing for Telegraph Engineers.

Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 264 pp Net, $4.00

ZEIDLER, J., and LUSTGARTEN, J. Electric Arc Lamps: Their Principles, Construction and Working.

160 Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 188 pp Net, $2.00

A 96 page Catalog of Books on Electricity, classified by

subjects, will be furnished gratis, postage prepaid,

on application.

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

are prepared to supply, either from

their complete stock or at

short notice,

Any Technical or

Scientific Book

In addition to publishing a very large

and varied number of SCIENTIFIC AND

ENGINEERING BOOKS, D. Van Nostrand

Company have on hand the largest

assortment in the United States of such

books issued by American and foreign

publishers.

All inquiries are cheerfully and

carefully answered and complete catalogs

sent free on request.

25 PARK PLACE - - NEW YORK

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK
WIRELESS TELEGRAPH CONSTRUCTION FOR AMATEURS
***

A Word from Project Gutenberg

We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under:
https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/64174

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works to protect the Project Gutenberg™ concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific
permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for
nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research.  They may be modified and printed and given
away – you may do practically
anything
in the United States with
eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject
to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

The Full Project Gutenberg License

Please read this before you distribute or use this work.

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at

https://www.gutenberg.org/license
.

Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by
the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free
access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works
in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project
Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with
the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format
with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it
without charge with others.

1.D.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also
govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most
countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the
United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms
of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work.  The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E.
Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.
The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org
.  If you are not
located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws of the
country where you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

1.E.4.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg™.

1.E.5.
Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute
this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6.
You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other
than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site
(
https://www.gutenberg.org
), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.
Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that

You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
“Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation.”

You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
works.

You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

1.F.

1.F.1.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend
considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe
and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating
the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be
stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a
copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or
damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that
damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2.
LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the
“Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.
Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set
forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH
NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6.
INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation,
the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org
.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at

https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf
. Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to
the full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org
. Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby

Chief Executive and Director

gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing
the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status
with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected
editions
of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is
renamed.
Versions
based on separate sources are treated as new
eBooks receiving new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility:

https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe
to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.