The Project Gutenberg eBook of Under dispute by Agnes Repplier

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at
www.gutenberg.org
. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title:
Under dispute

Author:
Agnes Repplier

Release Date:
September 2, 2023 [eBook #71550]

Language:
English

Credits:
The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER DISPUTE ***

UNDER DISPUTE

BY

AGNES REPPLIER,
Litt.D.

AUTHOR OF “POINTS OF FRICTION,” “COMPROMISES,”

“COUNTER-CURRENTS,” ETC.

BOSTON AND NEW YORK

HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

The Riverside Press Cambridge

1924

COPYRIGHT, 1924, BY AGNES REPPLIER

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

The Riverside Press

CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS

PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.

Note

Five of the twelve essays in this volume,
“To Counsel the Doubtful,”
“The Happiness of Writing an Autobiography,”
“The Divineness of Discontent,”
“Strayed Sympathies,” and
“The Battlefield of Education,” are
reprinted through the courtesy of
The
Atlantic Monthly
; four of them, “The
Masterful Puritan,” “Are Americans a
Timid People?” “Allies,” and “The
American Laughs,” through the courtesy
of
The Yale Review
; “The
Preacher at Large,” through the courtesy
of
The Century Magazine
; “They
Had Their Day,” through the courtesy
of
Harper’s Magazine
; “The Idolatrous
Dog,” through the courtesy of
The
Forum
.

Contents

The Masterful Puritan

1

To Counsel the Doubtful

31

Are Americans a Timid People?

58

The Happiness of Writing an Autobiography

88

Strayed Sympathies

119

The Divineness of Discontent

148

Allies

178

They Had Their Day

203

The Preacher at Large

233

The Battlefield of Education

258

The American Laughs

286

The Idolatrous Dog

312

[Pg 1]

UNDER DISPUTE

The Masterful Puritan

When William Chillingworth,
preaching at Oxford in the first
year of England’s Civil War, defined
the Cavaliers as publicans and sinners,
and the Puritans as Scribes and Pharisees,
he expressed the reasonable irritation
of a scholar who had no taste
or aptitude for polemics, yet who had
been blown about all his life by every
wind of doctrine. Those were uneasy
years for men who loved moderation
in everything, and who found it in
nothing. It is not from such that we
can hope for insight into emotions from
which they were exempt, and purposes
to which they held no clue.

In our day it is generously conceded
[Pg 2]

that the Puritans made admirable ancestors.
We pay them this handsome
compliment in after-dinner speeches
at all commemorative meetings. Just
what they would have thought of their
descendants is an unprofitable speculation.
Three hundred years divide us
from those stern enthusiasts who, coveting
lofty things, found no price too high
to pay for them. “It is not with us as
with men whom small matters can discourage,
or small discontentments cause
to wish themselves at home again,”
wrote William Brewster, when one half
of the Mayflower Pilgrims had died in
the first terrible year, and no gleam of
hope shone on the survivors. To perish
of hunger and cold is not what we
should now call a “small discontentment.”
To most of us it would seem a
good and sufficient reason for abandoning
any enterprise whatsoever. Perhaps
if we would fix our attention upon
a single detail—the fact that for four
[Pg 3]

years the Plymouth colonists did not
own a cow—we should better understand
what life was like in that harsh
wilderness, where children who could
not get along without milk had but one
other alternative—to die.

Men as strong as were the Puritan
pioneers ask for no apologies at our
hands. Their conduct was shaped by
principles and convictions which would
be insupportable to us, but which are
none the less worthy of regard. Matthew
Arnold summed up our modern
disparagement of their standards when
he pictured Virgil and Shakespeare
crossing on the Mayflower, and finding
the Pilgrim fathers “intolerable company.”
I am not sure that this would
have been the case. Neither Virgil nor
Shakespeare could have survived Plymouth.
That much is plain. But three
months on the Mayflower might not
have been so “intolerable” as Mr.
Arnold fancied. The Roman and the
[Pg 4]

Elizabethan were strong-stomached observers
of humanity. They knew a man
when they saw one, and they measured
his qualities largely.

Even if we make haste to admit that
two great humanizers of society, art
and letters, played but a sorry part in
the Puritan colonies, we know they
were less missed than if these colonies
had been worldly ventures, established
solely in the interest of agriculture or
of trade. Sir Andrew Macphail tersely
reminds us that the colonists possessed
ideals of their own, “which so far transcended
the things of this world that
art and literature were not worth
bothering about in comparison with
them.” Men who believe that, through
some exceptional grace or good fortune,
they have found God, feel little need of
culture. If they believe that they share
God with all races, all nations, and all
ages, culture comes in the wake of religion.
But the Puritan’s God was a
[Pg 5]

somewhat exclusive possession. “Christ
died for a select company that was
known to Him, by name, from eternity,”
wrote the Reverend Samuel Willard,
pastor of the South Church,
Boston, and author of that famous
theological folio, “A Compleat Body of
Divinity.” “The bulk of mankind is
reserved for burning,” said Jonathan
Edwards genially; and his Northampton
congregation took his word for it.
That these gentlemen knew no more
about Hell and its inmates than did
Dante is a circumstance which does not
seem to have occurred to any one. A
preacher has some advantages over a
poet.

If the Puritans never succeeded in
welding together Church and State,
which was the desire of their hearts,
they had human nature to thank for
their failure. There is nothing so abhorrent—or
so perilous—to the soul
of man as to be ruled in temporal things
[Pg 6]

by clerical authority. Yet inasmuch
as the colony of Massachusetts Bay
had for its purpose the establishment
of a state in which all citizens should be
of the same faith, and church membership
should be essential to freemen, it
was inevitable that the preacher and
the elder should for a time dominate
public counsels. “Are you, sir, the person
who serves here?” asked a stranger
of a minister whom he met in the streets
of Rowley. “I am, sir, the person who
rules here,” was the swift and apt response.

Men whose position was thus firmly
established resented the unauthorized
intrusion of malcontents. Being reformers
themselves, they naturally did
not want to be reformed. Alone among
New England colonists, the Pilgrims of
Plymouth, who were Separatists or Independents,
mistrusted the blending of
civil and religious functions, and this
mistrust had deepened during the sojourn
[Pg 7]

of their leaders in Holland.
Moreover, unlike their Boston neighbours,
the Pilgrims were plain, simple
people; “not acquainted,” wrote Governor
Bradford, “with trades nor traffique,
but used to a countrie life, and
the innocente trade of husbandry.”
They even tried the experiment of
farming their land on a communal system,
and, as a result, came perilously
close to starvation. Only when each
man cultivated his own lot, that is,
when individualism supplanted socialism,
did they wring from the reluctant
soil food enough to keep them alive.

To the courage and intelligence of
the Pilgrim and Puritan leaders, Governor
Bradford and Governor Winthrop,
the settlers owed their safety and survival.
The instinct of self-government
was strong in these men, their measures
were practical measures, their wisdom
the wisdom of the world. If Bradford
had not made friends with the great
[Pg 8]

sachem, Massasoit, and clinched the
friendship by sending Edward Winslow
to doctor him with “a confection of
many comfortable conserves” when he
was ill, the Plymouth colonists would
have lost the trade with the Indians
which tided them over the first crucial
years. If Winthrop had not by force
of argument and persuasion obtained
the lifting of duties from goods sent to
England, and induced the British creditors
to grant favourable terms, the
Boston colony would have been bankrupt.
The keen desire of both Plymouth
and Boston to pay their debts
is pleasant to record, and contrasts
curiously with the reluctance of wealthy
States to accept the Constitution in
1789, lest it should involve a similar
course of integrity.

It is hardly worth while to censure
communities which were establishing,
or seeking to establish, “a strong religious
state” because they were intolerant.
[Pg 9]

Tolerance is not, and never
has been, compatible with strong religious
states. The Puritans of New
England did not endeavour to force
their convictions upon unwilling Christendom.
They asked only to be left in
peaceful possession of a singularly unprolific
corner of the earth, which they
were civilizing after a formula of their
own. Settlers to whom this formula
was antipathetic were asked to go elsewhere.
If they did not go, they were
sent, and sometimes whipped into the
bargain—which was harsh, but not
unreasonable.

Moreover, the “persecution” of
Quakers and Antinomians was not
primarily religious. Few persecutions
recorded in history have been. For
most of them theology has merely
afforded a pious excuse. Whatever
motives may have underlain the persistent
persecution of the Jews, hostility
to their ancient creed has had little or
[Pg 10]

nothing to do with it. To us it seems
well-nigh incredible that Puritan Boston
should have vexed its soul because
Anne Hutchinson maintained that
those who were in the covenant of
grace were freed from the covenant of
works—which sounds like a cinch.
But when we remember that she
preached against the preachers, affirming
on her own authority that they had
not the “seal of the Spirit”; and that
she “gave vent to revelations,” prophesying
evil for the harassed and anxious
colonists, we can understand their
eagerness to be rid of her. She was an
able and intelligent woman, and her
opponents were not always able and
intelligent men. When the turmoil
which followed in her wake destroyed
the peace of the community, Governor
Winthrop banished her from Boston.
“It was,” says John Fiske, “an odious
act of persecution.”

A vast deal of sympathy has been
[Pg 11]

lavished upon the Puritan settlers because
of the rigours of their religion, the
austerity of their lives, their lack of intellectual
stimulus, the comprehensive
absence of anything like amusement.
It has been even said that their sexual
infirmities were due to the dearth of
pastimes; a point of view which is in
entire accord with modern sentiment,
even if it falls short of the facts. Impartial
historians might be disposed to
think that the vices of the Puritans are
apparent to us because they were so
industriously dragged to light. When
all moral offences are civil offences, and
when every man is under the close
scrutiny of his neighbours, the “find”
in sin is bound to be heavy. Captain
Kemble, a Boston citizen of some
weight and fortune, sat two hours in
the stocks on a wintry afternoon, 1656,
doing penance for “lewd and unseemly
behaviour”; which behaviour consisted
in kissing his wife “publiquely” at his
[Pg 12]

own front door on the Lord’s day. The
fact that he had just returned from a
long voyage, and was moved to the
deed by some excess of emotion, failed
to win him pardon. Neighbours were
not lightly flouted in a virtuous community.

That there were souls unfit to bear
the weight of Puritanism, and unable to
escape from it, is a tragic truth. People
have been born out of time and out of
place since the Garden of Eden ceased
to be a human habitation. When
Judge Sewall read to his household a
sermon on the text, “Ye shall seek me
and shall not find me,” the household
doubtless protected itself by inattention,
that refuge from admonition
which is Nature’s kindliest gift. But
there was one listener, a terrified child
of ten, who had no such bulwark, and
who brooded over her unforgiven sins
until her heart was bursting. Then
suddenly, when the rest of the family
[Pg 13]

had forgotten all about the sermon, she
broke into “an amazing cry,” sobbing
out her agonized dread of Hell. And
the pitiful part of the tale is that
neither father nor mother could comfort
her, having themselves no assurance
of her safety. “I answered her
Fears as well as I could,” wrote Judge
Sewall in his diary, “and prayed with
many Tears on either part. Hope God
heard us.”

The incident was not altogether uncommon.
A woman of Boston, driven
to desperation by the uncertainty of
salvation, settled the point for herself
by drowning her baby in a well, thus
ensuring damnation, and freeing her
mind of doubts. Methodism, though
gentler than Calvinism, accomplished
similar results. In Wesley’s journal
there is an account of William Taverner,
a boy of fourteen, who was a fellow
passenger on the voyage to Georgia;
and who, between heavy weather and
[Pg 14]

continuous exhortation, went mad with
fear, and saw an indescribable horror
at the foot of his bed, “which looked at
him all the time unless he was saying
his prayers.”

Our sympathy for a suffering minority
need not, however, blind us to the
fact that the vast majority of men hold
on to a creed because it suits them, and
because their souls are strengthened by
its ministrations. “It is sweet to believe
even in Hell,” says that archmocker,
Anatole France; and to no
article of faith have believers clung
more tenaciously. Frederick Locker
tells us the engaging story of a dignitary
of the Greek Church who ventured,
in the early years of faith, to question
this popular tenet; whereupon “his
congregation, justly incensed, tore
their bishop to pieces.”

No Puritan divine stood in danger
of suffering this particular form of
martyrdom. The religion preached
[Pg 15]

in New England was a cruel religion,
from which the figure of Christ, living
mercifully with men, was eliminated.
John Evelyn noted down in his diary
that he heard the Puritan magistrates
of London “speak spiteful things of our
Lord’s Nativity.” William Brewster was
proud to record that in Plymouth “no
man rested” on the first Christmas
day. As with Bethlehem, so with Calvary.
Governor Endicott slashed with
his sword the red cross of Saint George
from the banner of England. The
emblem of Christianity was anathema
to these Christians, as was the Mother
who bore Christ, and who saw Him die.
The children whom He blessed became
to Jonathan Edwards “young vipers,
and infinitely more hateful than vipers.”
The sweetness of religion, which
had solaced a suffering world, was wiped
out. “The Puritans,” wrote Henry
Adams pithily, “abandoned the New
Testament and the Virgin in order to
[Pg 16]

go back to the beginning, and renew
the quarrel with Eve.”

It took strong men to live and thrive
under such a ministration, wrestling
with a sullen earth for subsistence, and
with an angry Heaven for salvation.
Braced to endurance by the long frozen
winters, plainly fed and plainly clad, in
peril, like Saint Paul, of sea and wilderness,
narrow of vision but steadfast to
principles, they fronted life resolutely,
honouring and illustrating the supreme
worth of freedom.

That they had compensations, other
than religious, is apparent to all but the
most superficial observer. The languid
indifference to our neighbour’s moral
and spiritual welfare, which we dignify
by the name of tolerance, has curtailed
our interest in life. There must have
been something invigorating in the iron
determination that neighbours should
walk a straight path, that they should
be watched at every step, and punished
[Pg 17]

for every fall. The Puritan who said,
“I will not. Thou shalt not!” enjoyed
his authority to the uttermost. The
prohibitionist who repeats his words
to-day is probably the only man who is
having a thoroughly good time in our
fretful land and century. It is hard, I
know, to reconcile “I will not. Thou
shalt not!” with freedom. But the
early settlers of New England were
controlled by the weight of popular
opinion. A strong majority forced a
wavering minority along the road of
rectitude. Standards were then as
clearly defined as were boundaries, and
the uncompromising individualism of
the day permitted no juggling with
responsibility.

It is not possible to read the second
chapter of “The Scarlet Letter,” and
fail to perceive one animating principle
of the Puritan’s life. The townspeople
who watch Hester Prynne stand in the
pillory are moved by no common emotions.
[Pg 18]

They savour the spectacle, as
church-goers of an earlier age savoured
the spectacle of a penitent in sackcloth
at the portal; but they have also a
sense of personal participation in the
dragging of frailty to light. Hawthorne
endeavours to make this clear,
when, in answer to Roger Chillingworth’s
questions, a bystander congratulates
him upon the timeliness of
his arrival on the scene. “It must
gladden your heart, after your troubles
and sojourn in the wilderness, to find
yourself at length in a land where iniquity
is searched out, and punished in
the sight of rulers and people.” An unfortunate
speech to make to the husband
of the culprit (Hawthorne is seldom
so ironic), but a cordial admission
of content.

There was a picturesque quality
about the laws of New England, and a
nicety of administration, which made
them a source of genuine pleasure to all
[Pg 19]

who were not being judged. A lie, like
an oath, was an offense to be punished;
but all lies were not equally punishable.
Alice Morse Earle quotes three penalties,
imposed for three falsehoods,
which show how much pains a magistrate
took to discriminate. George
Crispe’s wife who “told a lie, not a
pernicious lie, but unadvisedly,” was
simply admonished. Will Randall who
told a “plain lie” was fined ten shillings.
Ralph Smith who “lied about seeing a
whale,” was fined twenty shillings and
excommunicated—which must have
rejoiced his suffering neighbours’ souls.

The rank of a gentleman, being a
recognized attribute in those days, was
liable to be forfeited for a disgraceful
deed. In 1631, Josias Plastowe of Boston
was fined five pounds for stealing
corn from the Indians; and it was likewise
ordered by the Court that he
should be called in the future plain
Josias, and not Mr. Plastowe as formerly.
[Pg 20]

Here was a chance for the community
to take a hand in punishing a
somewhat contemptible malefactor. It
would have been more or less than
human if it had not enjoyed the
privilege.

By far the neatest instance of making
the punishment fit the crime is recorded
in Governor Bradford’s “Diary
of Occurrences.” The carpenter employed
to construct the stocks for the
Plymouth colonists thought fit to
charge an excessive rate for the job;
whereupon he was speedily clapped
into his own instrument, “being the
first to suffer this penalty.” And
we

profess to pity the Puritans for the
hardness and dulness of their lives!
Why, if we could but see a single
profiteer sitting in the stocks, one man
out of the thousands who impudently
oppress the public punished in this admirable
and satisfactory manner, we
should be willing to listen to sermons
[Pg 21]

two hours long for the rest of our
earthly days.

And the Puritans relished their sermons,
which were masterful like themselves.
Dogma and denunciation were
dear to their souls, and they could bear
an intolerable deal of both. An hour-glass
stood on the preacher’s desk, and
youthful eyes strayed wistfully to the
slender thread of sand. But if the discourse
continued after the last grain
had run out, a tithingman who sat by
the desk turned the glass, and the congregation
settled down for a fresh hearing.
A three-hour sermon was a possibility
in those iron days, while an eloquent
parson, like Samuel Torrey of
Weymouth, could and did pray for two
hours at a stretch. The Reverend John
Cotton, grandfather of the redoubtable
Cotton Mather, and the only minister
in Boston who was acknowledged by
Anne Hutchinson to possess the mysterious
“seal of the Spirit,” had a
[Pg 22]

reprehensible habit of preaching for two
hours on Sunday in the meeting-house
(his family and servants of course
attending), and at night, after supper,
repeating this sermon to the sleepy
household who had heard it in the
morning.

For a hundred and fifty years the
New England churches were unheated,
and every effort to erect stoves was
vigorously opposed. This at least could
not have been a reaction against Popery,
inasmuch as the churches of Catholic
Christendom were at that time
equally cold. That the descendants of
men who tore the noble old organs out
of English cathedrals, and sold them
for scrap metal, should have been
chary of accepting even a “pitch-pipe”
to start their unmelodious singing was
natural enough; but stoves played no
part in the service. The congregations
must have been either impervious to
discomfort, or very much afraid of fires.
[Pg 23]

The South Church of Boston was first
heated in the winter of 1783. There
was much criticism of such indulgence,
and the “Evening Post,” January
25th, burst into denunciatory verse:

“Extinct the sacred fires of love,

Our zeal grown cold and dead;

In the house of God we fix a stove

To warm us in their stead.”

Three blots on the Puritans’ escutcheon
(they were men, not seraphs)
have been dealt with waveringly by
historians. Witchcraft, slavery and
Indian warfare gloom darkly against a
shining background of righteousness.
Much has been made of the fleeting
phase, and little of the more permanent
conditions—which proves the
historic value of the picturesque. That
Salem should to-day sell witch spoons
and trinkets, trafficking upon memories
she might be reasonably supposed to
regret, is a triumph of commercialism.
The brief and dire obsession of witchcraft
[Pg 24]

was in strict accord with times
and circumstances. It bred fear, horror,
and a tense excitement which lifted
from Massachusetts all reproach of
dulness. The walls between the known
and the unknown world were battered
savagely, and the men and women who
thronged from house to house to see
the “Afflicted Children” writhe in convulsions
had a fearful appreciation of
the spectacle. That terrible child, Ann
Putnam, who at twelve years of age
was instrumental in bringing to the
scaffold some of the most respected
citizens of Salem, is a unique figure in
history. The apprehensive interest she
inspired in her townspeople may be
readily conceived. It brought her to
ignominy in the end.

The Plymouth colonists kept on
good terms with their Indian neighbours
for half a century. The Bay
colonists had more aggressive neighbours,
and dealt with them accordingly.
[Pg 25]

It was an unequal combat. The
malignancy of the red men lacked concentration
and thoroughness. They
were only savages, and accustomed to
episodic warfare. The white men knew
the value of finality. When Massachusetts
planned with Connecticut to exterminate
the Pequots, less than a
dozen men escaped extermination. It
was a very complete killing, and no
settler slept less soundly for having had
a hand in it. Mr. Fiske says that the
measures employed in King Philip’s
War “did not lack harshness,” which
is a euphemism. The flinging of the
child Astyanax over the walls of Troy
was less barbarous than the selling of
King Philip’s little son into slavery.
Hundreds of adult captives were sent
at the same time to Barbados. It
would have been more merciful, though
less profitable, to have butchered them
at home.

The New England settlers were not
[Pg 26]

indifferent to the Indians’ souls. They
forbade them, when they could, to
hunt or fish on the Lord’s day. John
Eliot, Jonathan Edwards, and other
famous divines preached to them earnestly,
and gave them a fair chance of
salvation. But, like all savages, they
had a trick of melting into the forest
just when their conversion seemed at
hand. Cotton Mather, in his “Magnalia,”
speculates ruthlessly upon their
condition and prospects. “We know
not,” he writes, “when or how these
Indians first became inhabitants of this
mighty continent; yet we may guess
that probably the Devil decoyed these
miserable savages hither, in hopes that
the Gospel of the Lord would never
come to destroy or disturb his absolute
Empire over them.”

Naturally, no one felt well disposed
towards a race which was under the
dominion of Satan. Just as the Celt
and the Latin have small compunction
[Pg 27]

in ill-treating animals, because they
have no souls, so the Puritan had small
compunction in ill-treating heathens,
because their souls were lost.

Slavery struck no deep roots in New
England soil, perhaps because the
nobler half of the New England conscience
never condoned it, perhaps because
circumstances were unfavourable
to its development. The negroes died
of the climate, the Indians of bondage.
But traders, in whom conscience was
not uppermost, trafficked in slaves as
in any other class of merchandise, and
stoutly refused to abandon a profitable
line of business. Moreover, the deep
discordance between slavery as an institution
and Puritanism as an institution
made such slave-holding more
than ordinarily odious. Agnes Edwards,
in an engaging little volume on
Cape Cod, quotes a clause from the will
of John Bacon of Barnstable, who bequeathed
to his wife for her lifetime
[Pg 28]

the “use and improvement” of a slave-woman,
Dinah. “If, at the death of
my wife, Dinah be still living, I desire
my executors to sell her, and to use and
improve the money for which she is
sold in the purchase of Bibles, and distribute
them equally among my said
wife’s and my grandchildren.”

There are fashions in goodness and
badness as in all things else; but the
selling of a worn-out woman for Bibles
goes a step beyond Mrs. Stowe’s most
vivid imaginings.

These are heavy indictments to bring
against the stern forbears whom we are
wont to praise and patronize. But Pilgrim
and Puritan can bear the weight
of their misdeeds as well as the glory of
their achievements. Of their good old
English birthright, “truth, pitie, freedom
and hardiness,” they cherished all
but pitie. No price was too high for
them to pay for the dignity of their
manhood, or for the supreme privilege
[Pg 29]

of dwelling on their own soil. They
scorned the line of least resistance.
Their religion was never a cloak for
avarice, and labour was not with them
another name for idleness and greed.
Eight hours a day they held to be long
enough for an artisan to work; but the
principle of giving little and getting
much, which rules our industrial world
to-day, they deemed unworthy of freemen.
No swollen fortunes corrupted
their communities; no base envy of
wealth turned them into prowling
wolves. If they slew hostile Indians
without compunction, they permitted
none to rob those who were friendly
and weak. If they endeavoured to exclude
immigrants of alien creeds, they
would have thought shame to bar them
out because they were harder workers
or better farmers than themselves. On
the whole, a comparison between their
methods and our own leaves us little
room for self-congratulation.

[Pg 30]

From that great mother country
which sends her roving sons over land
and sea, the settlers of New England
brought undimmed the sacred fire of
liberty. If they were not akin to Shakespeare,
they shared the inspiration of
Milton. “No nobler heroism than
theirs,” says Carlyle, “ever transacted
itself on this earth.” Their laws were
made for the strong, and commanded
respect and obedience. In Plymouth,
few public employments carried any
salary; but no man might refuse office
when it was tendered to him. The
Pilgrim, like the Roman, was expected
to serve the state, not batten on it.
What wonder that a few drops of his
blood carries with it even now some
measure of devotion and restraint.
These were men who understood that
life is neither a pleasure nor a calamity.
“It is a grave affair with which we are
charged, and which we must conduct
and terminate with honour.”

[Pg 31]

“To Counsel the Doubtful”

In the “Colony Records” of Plymouth
it is set down that a certain
John Williams lived unhappily with his
wife—a circumstance which was as
conceivable in that austere community
as in less godly towns. But the Puritan
magistrate who, in the year 1666, undertook
to settle this connubial quarrel,
had no respect for that compelling
word, “incompatibility.” The afflicted
couple were admonished “to apply
themselves to such waies as might
make for the recovery of peace and love
betwixt them. And for that end, the
Court requested Isacke Bucke to bee
officious therein.”

It is the delight and despair of readers,
especially of readers inclined to the
intimacies of history, that they are so
often told the beginnings of things, and
left to conjecture the end. How did
[Pg 32]

Isacke Bucke set about his difficult and
delicate commission, and how did the
contentious pair relish his officiousness?
The Puritans were tolerably accustomed
to proffering advice. It was
part of their social code, as well as a
civil and religious duty. They had a
happy belief in the efficacy of expostulation.
In 1635 it was proposed that
the magistrates of Boston should “in
tenderness and love admonish one
another.” And many lively words must
have come of it.

Roman Catholics, who studied their
catechism when they were children,
will always remember that the first of
the “Spiritual Works of Mercy” is
“To counsel the doubtful.” Taken in
conjunction with the thirteen other
works, it presents a compendium of
holiness. Taken by itself, apart from
less popular rulings, such as “To forgive
offences,” and “To bear wrongs
patiently,” it is apt to be a trifle overbearing.
[Pg 33]

Catholic theology has defined
the difference between a precept and a
counsel—when the Church speaks. A
precept is binding, and obedience to it
is an obligation. A counsel is suggestive,
and obedience to it is a matter of volition.
The same distinction holds good
in civil and social life. A law must be
obeyed; but it is in no despite of our
counsellors, moral or political, that we
reserve the right of choice.

Three hundred years ago, Robert
Burton, who was reflective rather than
mandatory, commented upon the reluctance
of heretics to be converted
from their errors. It seemed to him—a
learned and detached onlooker—that
one man’s word, however well
spoken, had no effect upon another
man’s views; and he marvelled unconcernedly
that this should be the case.
The tolerance or the indifference of our
day has disinclined most of us to meddle
with our neighbour’s beliefs. We
[Pg 34]

are concerned about his tastes, his
work, his politics, because at these
points his life touches ours; but we
have a decent regard for his spiritual
freedom, and for the secret responsibility
it entails.

There are, indeed, devout Christian
communities which expend their time,
money and energy in extinguishing in
the breasts of other Christians the
faith which has sufficed and supported
them. The methods of these propagandists
are more genial than were
those of the Inquisition; but their
temerity is no less, and their animating
principle is the same. They proffer
their competing set of dogmas with absolute
assurance, forgetting that man
does not live by fractions of theology,
but by the correspondence of his nature
to spiritual influences moulded through
the centuries to meet his needs. To
counsel the doubtful is a Christian
duty; but to create the doubts we
[Pg 35]

counsel is nowhere recommended. It
savours too closely of omniscience.

The counsels offered by age to youth
are less expansive, and less untrammelled
than are the counsels offered by
youth to age. Experience dulls the
courageous and imaginative didacticism
that is so heartening, because so
sanguine, in the young. We have been
told, both in England and in the United
States, that youth is now somewhat
displeased with age, as having made a
mess of the world it was trying to run;
and that the shrill defiance which meets
criticism indicates this justifiable resentment.
It is not an easy matter to
run a world at the best of times, and
Germany’s unfortunate ambition to
control the running has put the job beyond
man’s power of immediate adjustment.
The social lapses that have
been so loudly lamented by British and
American censors are the least serious
symptoms of the general disintegration—the
[Pg 36]

crumbling away of a cornice
when the foundations are insecure.

It is interesting, however, to note the
opposing methods employed by carping
age to correct the excesses of youth.
When a Western State disapproves of
the behaviour of its young people, it
turns to the courts for relief. It asks
and obtains laws regulating the length
of a skirt, or the momentum of a dance.
When a New England State disapproves
of the behaviour of its young
people, it writes articles, or circulates
and signs a remonstrance. Sometimes
it confides its grievance to a Federation
of Women’s Clubs, hoping that the
augustness of this assembly will overawe
the spirit of revolt. I may add that
when Canada (Province of Quebec)
disapproves of the behaviour of its
young people, it appeals to the Church,
which acts with commendable promptness
and semi-occasional success.

All these torrents of disapproval
[Pg 37]

have steeped society in an ebb-tide of
rejected counsels. It would seem that
none of us are conducting ourselves as
properly as we should, and that few of
us are satisfactory to our neighbours.
In the rapid shifting of responsibility,
we find ourselves accused when we
thought we were accusers. We say that
a girl’s dress fails to cover a proper percentage
of her body, and are told that
it is the consequence of our inability to
preserve peace. We pay a predatory
grocer the price he asks for his goods,
and are told that it is our fault he asks
it. If we plead that hunger-striking—the
only alternative—is incompatible
with common sense and hard work, we
are offered a varied assortment of substitutes
for food. There is nothing in
which personal tastes are more pronounced
or less persuasive than in the
devices of economy. Sooner or later
they resolve themselves into the query
of the famous and frugal Frenchman:
[Pg 38]

“Why should I pay twelve francs for an
umbrella when I can buy a bock for six
sous?”

The most hopeful symptom of our
times (so fraught with sullenness and
peril) is the violent hostility developed
some years ago between rival schools of
verse. There have always been individual
critics as sensitive to contrary
points of view as are the men who organize
raids on Carnegie Hall whenever
they disagree with a speaker. Swinburne
was a notable example of this
tyranny of opinion. It was not enough
for him to love Dickens and to hate
Byron, thus neatly balancing his loss
and gain. He was impelled by the
terms of his nature ardently to proclaim
his love and his hate, and intemperately
to denounce those who
loved and hated otherwise.

That so keen and caustic a commentator
as Mr. Chesterton should have
been annoyed because he could not
[Pg 39]

turn back the tide of popular enthusiasm
which surged and broke at Rudyard
Kipling’s feet was natural enough.
He assured the British public that
“Recessional” was the work of a
“solemn cad”; and the British public—quite
as if he had not spoken—took
the poem to its heart, wept over it,
prayed over it, and dilated generally
with emotions which it is good for a
public to feel. The looker-on was reminded
a little of Horace Walpole fretfully
explaining to Paris that a Salisbury
Court printer could not possibly
know anything about the habits of the
English aristocracy; and of Paris replying
to this ultimatum by reading
“Clarissa Harlowe” with all its might
and main, and shedding torrents of
tears over the printer’s matchless heroine.

The asperity of a solitary critic is,
however, far less impelling than the
asperity of a whole school of writers
[Pg 40]

and of their opponents. Just when the
ways of the world seemed darkest, and
its nations most distraught, the
literati

effected a welcome diversion by quarreling
over rules of prosody. The
lovers of rhyme were not content to
read rhyme and to write it; the lovers
of polyphonic prose were not content to
read polyphonic prose and to write it;
but both factions found their true joy
in vivaciously criticizing and counselling
their antagonists. Miss Amy Lowell
was right when she said, with her customary
insight and decision, that the
beliefs and protests and hates of poets
all go to prove the deathless vigour of
the art. Unenlightened outsiders took
up the quarrel with pleasure, finding
relief in a dispute that threatened
death and disaster to no one.

Few contentions are so innocent of
ill-doing. The neighbours whom we
counsel most assiduously are the nations
of the world and their governments,
[Pg 41]

which might well be doubtful,
seeing that they stumble at every step;
but which perhaps stand more in need
of smooth roads than of direction. It
is true that M. Stéphane Lauzanne,
editor of “Le Matin,” assured us in the
autumn of 1920 that France did not
seek American gold, or ships, or guns,
or soldiers—“only counsels.” This
sounded quite in our line, until the
Frenchman, with that fatal tendency
to the concrete which is typical of the
Gallic mind, proceeded to explain his
meaning: “We ask of the country of
Edison and of the Wrights that it will
present us with a system for a league of
nations that will work. If there were
nothing needed but eloquence, the
statesmen of old Europe would have
been sufficient.”

Why did not M. Lauzanne ask for
the moon while he was about it? What
does he suppose we Americans have
been striving for since 1789 but systems
[Pg 42]

that will work? Henry Adams, commenting
upon the disastrous failure of
Grant’s administration, says just this
thing. “The world” (the American
world) “cared little for decency. What
it wanted, it did not know. Probably a
system that would work, and men who
could work it. But it found neither.”

And still the search goes on. A system
of taxation that will work. A system
of wage-adjustment that will work.
A system of prohibition that will work.
A system of public education that will
work. These are the bright phantoms
we pursue; and now a Paris editor
casually adds a system for a working
league of nations. “If France is in the
right, let America give us her moral
support. If France is in the wrong,
let America show us the road to follow.”

To presume agreement where none
exists is the most dangerous form of
self-deception. When newspapers and
[Pg 43]

orators tell us that to the United States
has come “the moral leadership of the
world,” we must understand them to
imply that foreign nations, with whom
we have little in common, are of our
way of thinking—provided always
that they know what we think, and that
we know ourselves. For the wide divergence
of national aspirations, they
make scant allowance; for misunderstanding
and ill-will, they make no allowance
at all. Before the election of
1920, the spokesmen of both political
parties assured us with equal fervour
that our country was destined to be the
bulwark of the world’s peace. Their
prescriptions for peace differed radically
in detail; but all agreed that ours was
to be the administering hand, and all
implied the readiness of Europe (and,
if need be, Asia and Africa) to accept
our restoratives. “Want America to
teach Turkey,” was the headline of a
leading newspaper, which, in October,
[Pg 44]

1920, deplored the general unteachableness
of the Turk.

Perhaps the careless crudeness of
headlines deceives a large class of hurried
readers who rely too implicitly
upon them. When the Conference at
Versailles was plodding through its
task, a New York paper announced in
large type: “Italy dissatisfied with territory
assigned her by Colonel House.”
It had a mirth-provoking sound; but,
after all, the absurdity was in no way
attributable to Colonel House; and, in
the matter of dissatisfaction, not even
a headline could go beyond the facts.
What has ever impelled the “Tribuna”
and the “Avanti” to express amicable
agreement, save their mutual determination
to repudiate the intervention of
the United States?

When Mr. Wilson risked speaking
directly to the Italian people, he paved
the way for misunderstanding. To a
government, words are words. It deals
[Pg 45]

with them itself, and it makes allowance
for the difficulty of translating
them into action. But a proletariat is
apt, not merely to attach significance
to words, but to read an intensive
meaning into them. We have not done
badly by Italy. We spent a great deal
of money upon her cold and hungry
children. She is sending us shiploads
of immigrants. Her resentment at our
counsel has seemed to us unwise and
ungrateful, seeing that we must naturally
know what is best for her. We
cannot accept ill-will with the unconcern
of Great Britain, which has been
used to it, and has survived it, for centuries.
We feel that we deserve well of
the world, because we are immaculately
free from coveting what we do not
want or need.

And yet one wonders now and then
whether, if there had been four years
of glorious and desolating war on this
Western continent, and the United
[Pg 46]

States had emerged triumphant, but
spent, broken and bankrupt, we should
be so sure of our mission to regenerate.
Would we then be so high-handed with
England, so critical of France? No
people in the world resent strictures
more than we do. No people in the
world are less keen for admonishment.
The sixty-six members of the Yale
Faculty who in 1920 sent a remonstrance
to Congress, protesting against
any interference in the domestic policies
of Great Britain, based their protest
upon our unalterable determination
to preserve our own independence
unviolated, and to manage our own
affairs. They felt, and said, that we
should be scrupulous to observe the
propriety we exacted of others.

The ingenious device of appointing
an American committee, which in its
turn appointed an American commission
to sit as a court of appeal, and receive
evidence touching the relations
[Pg 47]

of Great Britain and Ireland, was the
most original and comprehensive measure
for counselling the doubtful that
this country has ever seen. The informality
of the scheme made it a pure
delight. Governors of Wyoming and
North Dakota, mayors of Milwaukee
and Anaconda, clergymen and college
professors, ladies and gentlemen of unimpeachable
respectability and unascertainable
information, all responded
to the “Nation’s” call, and placed their
diplomacy at its disposal.

Pains were taken by Mr. Villard to
convince the public that the object of
the committee was to avert “the greatest
calamity which could befall the
civilized world”—a war between
Great Britain and the United States,
than which nothing seemed less likely.
Its members disclaimed anything like
“improper interference in the concerns
of another nation.” They evidently
did not consider that summoning Ireland
[Pg 48]

and England to appear as plaintiff
and defendant before a self-constituted
tribunal three thousand miles away
was in the nature of an interference.
“I meddle with no man’s conscience,”
said Cromwell broad-mindedly, when
he closed the Catholic churches, and
forbade the celebration of Mass.

The humour of selecting a group of
men and women in one corner of the
world, and delegating to them the unofficial
task of settling public affairs in
another, was lost upon Americans, who,
having been repeatedly told that they
were to “show the way,” conceived
themselves to be showing it. When
Great Britain and Ireland settled their
own affairs without asking our advice
or summoning our aid, there were
hyphenated citizens in New York and
elsewhere who deeply resented such independent
action, and who have shown
ever since a bitter unfriendliness to
their own kith and kin. Even Mr.
[Pg 49]

Cosgrave’s burst of Gaelic eloquence
before the League of Nations, which
should have melted a heart of flint, was
powerless to allay their ill-temper.

If well-meaning counsellors could be
persuaded that there are phenomena
upon which they are not all qualified to
give advice, they might perhaps forbear
to send delegations of children to
the White House. This is a popular
diversion, and one which is much to be
deplored. In the hour of our utmost
depression, when our rights as a free
nation were denied us, and the lives of
our citizens were imperilled on land and
sea, a number of children were sent to
Mr. Wilson, to ask him not to go to
war. It was as though they had asked
him not to play games on Sunday, or
not to put Christmas candles in his
windows. Three years later, another
deputation of innocents marched past
the White House, bearing banners with
severely worded directions from their
[Pg 50]

mothers as to how the President (then
a very ill man) should conduct himself.
The language used was of reprehensible
rudeness. The exhortations themselves
appeared to be irrelevant. “American
women demand that anarchy in the
White House be stopped!” puzzled the
onlookers, who wondered what was
happening in that sad abode of pain,
what women these were who knew so
much about it, and why a children’s
crusade had been organized for the
control of our foreign and domestic
policies.

The last query is the easiest answered.
Picketing is a survival of the childish
instinct in the human heart. It represents
the play-spirit about which modern
educators talk so glibly, and which
we are bidden to cherish and preserve.
A society of “American Women Pickets”
(delightful phrase!) is out to enjoy
itself, and its pleasures are as simple as
they are satisfying. To parade the
[Pg 51]

streets, to proffer impertinent instructions,
to be stared at by passers-by, and
to elude the law which seeks to abate
public nuisances—what better sport
could be asked either for little boys and
girls, or for Peter Pans valiantly refusing
to mature? Mr. Harding was
pursued in his day by picketing children,
and Mr. Coolidge has probably
the same pleasure awaiting him. Even
the tomb at Mount Vernon has been
surrounded by malcontents, bearing
banners with the inscription, “Washington,
Thou Art Truly Dead!” To
which the mighty shade, who in his day
had heard too often the sound and fury
of importunate counsels, and who, because
he would not hearken, had been
abused, like “a Nero, a defaulter and a
pickpocket,” might well have answered
from the safety and dignity of the
tomb, “Deo gratias!”

When a private citizen calls at the
White House, to “frankly advise” a
[Pg 52]

modification of the peace treaty; when a
private citizen writes to the American
Bar Association, to “frankly advise”
this distinguished body of men to forbear
from any discussion of public affairs at
their annual meeting; when a private
citizeness writes to the Secretary of
War to “frankly advise” that he should
treat the slacker of to-day as he would
treat the hero of to-morrow, we begin
to realize how far the individual American
is prepared to dry-nurse the Nation.
Every land has its torch-bearers,
but nowhere else do they all profess to
carry the sacred fire. It is difficult to
admonish Frenchmen. Their habit of
mind is unfavourable to preachment.
We can hardly conceive a delegation of
little French girls sent to tell M. Millerand
what their mothers think of him.
Even England shows herself at times
impatient of her monitors. “Mr. Norman
Angell is very cross,” observed a
British reviewer dryly. “Europe is
[Pg 53]

behaving in her old mad way without
having previously consulted him.”

“Causes are the proper subject of
history,” says Mr. Brownell, “and
characteristics are the proper subject
of criticism.” It may be that much of
our criticism is beside the mark, because
we disregard the weight of history.
Our fresh enthusiasm for small
nations is dependent upon their docility,
and upon their respect for boundary
lines which the big nations have painstakingly
defined. That a boundary
which has been fought over for centuries
should be more provocative of
dispute than a claim staked off in Montana
does not occur to an American
who has little interest in events that
antedate the Declaration of Independence.
Countries, small, weak and incredibly
old, whose sons are untaught
and unfed, appear to be eager for supplies
and insensible to moral leadership.
We recognize these characteristics, and
[Pg 54]

resent or deplore them according to our
dispositions; but for an explanation of
the causes—which might prove enlightening—we
must go further back
than Americans care to travel.

“I seldom consult others, and am
seldom attended to; and I know no concern,
either public or private, that has
been mended or bettered by my advice.”
So wrote Montaigne placidly in
the great days of disputation, when men
counselled the doubtful with sword and
gun, reasoning in platoons, and correcting
theological errors with the all-powerful
argument of arms. Few men
were then guilty of intolerance, and
fewer still understood with Montaigne
and Burton the irreclaimable obstinacy
of convictions. There reigned a profound
confidence in intellectual and
physical coercion. It was the opinion
of John Donne, poet and pietist, that
Satan was deeply indebted to the counsels
of Saint Ignatius Loyola, which is a
[Pg 55]

higher claim for the intelligence of that
great churchman than Catholics have
ever advanced. Milton, whose ardent
and compelling mind could not conceive
of tolerance, failed to comprehend
that Puritanism was out of accord with
the main currents of English thought
and temper. He not only assumed that
his enemies were in the wrong, says Sir
Leslie Stephen, “but he often seemed
to expect that they would grant so
obvious an assertion.”

This sounds modern. It even sounds
American. We are so confident that we
are showing the way, we have been told
so repeatedly that what we show is the
way, that we cannot understand the
reluctance of our neighbours to follow
it. There is a curious game played by
educators, which consists in sending

questionnaires
to some hundreds, or
some thousands, of school-children, and
tabulating their replies for the enlightenment
of the adult public. The
[Pg 56]

precise purport of this game has never
been defined; but its popularity impels
us to envy the leisure that educators
seem to enjoy. A few years ago twelve
hundred and fourteen little Californians
were asked if they made collections of
any kind, and if so, what did they collect?
The answers were such as might
have been expected, with one exception.
A small and innocently ironic boy wrote
that he collected “bits of advice.” His
hoard was the only one that piqued
curiosity; but, as in the case of Isacke
Bucke and the quarrelsome couple of
Plymouth, we were left to our own conjectures.

The fourth “Spiritual Work of
Mercy” is “To comfort the sorrowful.”
How gentle and persuasive it sounds
after its somewhat contentious predecessors;
how sure its appeal; how
gracious and reanimating its principle!
The sorrowful are, after all, far in excess
of the doubtful; they do not have
[Pg 57]

to be assailed; their sad faces are turned
toward us, their sad hearts beat responsively
to ours. The eddying drifts
of counsel are loud with disputation;
but the great tides of human emotion
ebb and flow in obedience to forces that
work in silence.

“The innocent moon, that nothing does but shine,

Moves all the labouring surges of the world.”

[Pg 58]

Are Americans a
Timid People?

As the hare is timid—no! They
have made good their fighting
record in war. They have proved themselves
over and over again to be tranquilly
courageous in moments of acute
peril. They have faced “their duty and
their death” as composedly as Englishmen;
and nobler comparison there
is none. The sinking of the Titanic
offered but one opportunity out of
many for the display of a quality which
is apt to be described in superlatives;
but which is, nevertheless, an inherent
principle of manhood. The protective
instinct is strong in the native American.
He does not prate about the
sacredness of human life, because he
knows, consciously or unconsciously,
that the most sacred thing in life is the
will to surrender it unfalteringly.

[Pg 59]

Of what then are Americans afraid,
and what form does their timidity take?
Mr. Harold Stearns puts the case
coarsely and strongly when he affirms
that our moral code resolves itself into
fear of what people may say. With a
profound and bitter distaste for things
as they are, he bids us beware lest we
confuse “the reformistic tendencies of
our national life—Pollyanna optimism,
prohibition, blue laws, clericalism,
home and foreign missions, exaggerated
reverence for women, with
anything a civilized man can legitimately
call moral idealism.... These
manifestations are the fine flower of
timidity, and fear, and ignorance.”

Mr. Stearns is a robust writer. His
antagonists, if he has any, need never
fear the sharp thrust of an understatement.
He recognizes the tyranny of
opinion in the United States; but he
does not do full justice to its serio-comic
aspects, to the part it plays in
[Pg 60]

trivial as well as in august affairs, to the
nervousness of our regard, to the absurdities
of our subordination. There
are successful newspapers and periodicals
whose editors and contributors
walk a chalked path, shunning facts,
ignoring issues, avoiding the two things
which spell life for all of us—men and
customs—and triumphantly presenting
a non-existent world to unobservant
readers. Henry Adams said that
the magazine-made female has not a
feature that would have been recognized
by Adam; but our first father’s
experience, while intimate and conclusive,
was necessarily narrow. We
have evolved a magazine-made universe,
unfamiliar to the eyes of the
earth-dweller, and unrelated to his soul.

When this country was pronounced
to be too democratic for liberty, the
epigram came as close to the truth as
epigrams are ever permitted to come.
Democracies have been systematically
[Pg 61]

praised because we stand committed to
democratic tenets, and have no desire
to foul our own roost. It is granted that
equality, rather than freedom, is their
animating principle. It is granted also
that they are sometimes unfortunate in
their representatives; that their legislative
bodies are neither intelligent nor
disinterested, and that their public
service is apt to be distinguished for its
incapacity. But with so much vigour
and proficiency manifested every day
in private ventures, we feel they can
afford a fair share of departmental incompetence.
The tremendous reserves
of will and manhood, the incredible
insufficiency of direction, which Mr.
Wells remarked in democratic England
when confronted by an overwhelming
crisis, were equally apparent in the
United States. It would seem as though
a high average of individual force and
intelligence failed to offer material for
leadership.

[Pg 62]

The English, however, unlike Americans,
refuse to survey with unconcern
the spectacle of chaotic officialdom.
They are a fault-finding people, and
have expressed their dissatisfaction
since the days of King John and the
Magna Carta. They were no more
encouraged to find fault than were
other European commonalties that kept
silence, or spoke in whispers. The
Plantagenets were a high-handed race.
The hot-tempered Tudors resented any
opinions their subjects might form.
Elizabeth had no more loyal servant
than the unlucky John Stubbs, who
lost his right hand for the doubtful
pleasure of writing the “Gaping Gulf.”
Any other woman would have been
touched when the culprit, raising his
hat with his left hand which had been
mercifully spared, cried aloud, “God
save the Queen!” Not so the great
Elizabeth. Stubbs had expressed his
views upon her proposed marriage to
[Pg 63]

the Duke of Anjou, and it was no business
of his to have views, much less to
give them utterance; while his intimation
that, at forty-six, she was unlikely
to bear children was the most unpardonable
truth he could have spoken.

The Stuarts, with the exception of
the second Charles, were as resentful of
candour as were the Tudors. “I hope,”
said James the First to his Commons,
“that I shall hear no more about liberty
of speech.” The Hanoverians heartily
disliked British frankness because they
heartily disliked their unruly British
subjects. George the Third had all
Elizabeth’s irascibility without her
power to indulge it. And Victoria was
not much behind either of them—witness
her indignation at the “Greville
Memoirs,” “an insult to royalty,”
and her regret that the publishers were
not open to prosecution.

It was no use. Nothing could keep
the Englishman from speaking his
[Pg 64]

mind. With him it was not only
“What is there that a man dare not
do?” but “What is there that a man
dare not say?” Many a time he paid
more for the privilege than it was
worth; but he handed it down to his
sons, who took care that it was not lost
through disuse. When Sorbière visited
England in 1663, he was amazed to find
the “common people” discussing public
affairs in taverns and inns, recalling
the glories as well as the discomforts of
Cromwell’s day, and grumbling over
the taxes. “They do not forbear saying
what they think of the king himself.”
In the “Memoirs” of the publisher,
John Murray, there is an amusing
letter from the Persian envoy, Mirza
Abul Hassan, dated 1824, and expressing
his opinion of a government which
permitted such unrestrained liberty.
Englishmen “do what they like, say
what they like, write what they like in
their newspapers,” comments the Oriental
[Pg 65]

with bewildered but affectionate
contempt. “How far do you think it
safe to go in defying your sovereign?”
asked Madame de Pompadour of John
Wilkes, when that notorious plain-speaker
had taken refuge in Paris from
his incensed king and exasperated creditors.
“That, Madame,” said the member
from Aylesbury, “is what I am
trying to find out.”

In our day the indifference of the
British Government to what used to be
called “treasonable utterances” has in
it a galling element of contempt. Not
that the utterances are invariably
contemptible. Far from it. Blighting
truths as well as extravagant senilities
may still be heard in Hyde Park and
Trafalgar Square. But the orators
might be addressing their audiences in
classic Greek for any token the London
bobby gives of listening or comprehending.
“Words are the daughters of
earth; deeds are the sons of Heaven.”
[Pg 66]

The bobby has never heard this grandiloquent
definition; but he divides
them as clearly in his own mind into
hot air and disorderly conduct, and he
takes his measures accordingly.

In the United States, as in all countries
which enjoy a representative government,
censure and praise run in
familiar grooves. The party which is
out sees nothing but graft and incapacity
in the party which is in; and the
party which is in sees nothing but greed
and animosity in the party which is out.
This antagonism is duly reflected by
the press; and the job of arriving at a
correct conclusion is left to the future
historian. As an instance of the fashion
in which history can be sidetracked by
politics, the reader is referred to the
portraits of Andrew Jackson as drawn
by Mr. Beveridge in his “Life of John
Marshall,” and by Mr. Bowers in his
“Party Battles of the Jackson Period.”

The first lesson taught us by the
[Pg 67]

Great War was that we got nowhere in
political leading-strings, and that none
of our accustomed formulas covered
this strange upheaval. It was like trying
to make a correct survey of land
which was being daily cracked by earthquakes.
Our national timidity entrenched
itself behind a wilful disregard
of facts. It was content to view the
conflict as a catastrophe for which
nobody, or everybody, was to blame.
Our national intrepidity manifested
itself from the outset in a sense of
human responsibility, in a bitter denial
of our right to ignorance or indifference.
The timidity was not an actual
fear of getting hurt; the intrepidity was
not insensitiveness to danger. What
tore our Nation asunder was the question
of accepting or evading a challenge
which had—so we at first thought—only
a spiritual significance.

In one of Birmingham’s most genially
nonsensical stories, “The Island Mystery,”
[Pg 68]

there is an American gentleman
named Donovan. He is rich, elderly,
good-tempered, brave, kind and humorous;
as blameless in his private life as
King Arthur, as corrupt politically and
financially as Tweed or Fiske; a buyer
of men’s souls in the market-place, a
gentle, profound and invulnerable cynic.
To him a young Irishman sets forth the
value of certain things well worth the
surrender of life; but the old American
smiles away such a primitive mode of
reckoning. The salient article of his
creed is that nothing should be paid for
in blood that can be bought for money;
and that, as every man has his price,
money, if there is enough of it, will buy
the world. He is never betrayed, however,
into a callous word, being mindful
always of the phraseology of the press
and platform; and the reader is made to
understand that long acquaintance with
such phraseology has brought him close
to believing his own pretences. “In the
[Pg 69]

Middle West where I was raised,” he
observes mildly, “we don’t think guns
and shooting the proper way of settling
national differences. We’ve advanced
beyond those ideas. We’re a civilized
people, especially in the dry States,
where university education is common,
and the influence of women permeates
elections. We’ve attained a nobler outlook
upon life.” It reads like a humorous
illustration of Mr. Stearns’s unhumorous
invectives.

Sociologists are wont to point to the
American public as a remarkable instance
of the herd mind—a mind not
to be utterly despised. It makes for
solidity, if not for enlightenment. It is
the most economical way of thinking;
it saves trouble and it saves noise. So
acute an observer as Lord Chesterfield
set store by it as unlikely to disturb the
peace of society; so practical a statesman
as Sir Robert Walpole found it the
best substratum upon which to rear the
[Pg 70]

fabric of constitutional government. It
is most satisfactory and most popular
when void of all sentiment save such
as can be expressed by a carnation on
Mother’s Day, or by the social activities
of an Old Home Week. Strong
emotions are as admittedly insubordinate
as strong convictions. “A world
full of patriots,” sighs the peace-loving
Honourable Bertrand Russell, “may be
a world full of strife.” This is true. A
single patriot has been known to breed
strife in plenty. Who can measure the
blood poured out in the cause that
Wallace led, the “sacred” human lives
sacrificed at his behest, the devastations
that marked his victories and defeats?
And all that came of such regrettable disturbances
were a gallows at Smithfield, a
name that shines like a star in the murk
of history, and a deathless impulse to
freedom in the hearts of a brave people.

The herd mind is essentially and inevitably
a timid mind. Mr. Sinclair
[Pg 71]

Lewis has analyzed it with relentless
acumen in his amazing novel, “Babbitt.”
The worthy citizen who gives
his name to the story has reached middle
age without any crying need to
think for himself. His church and his
newspaper have supplied his religious
and political creeds. If there are any
gaps left in his mind, they are filled up
at his business club, or at his “lodge,”
that kindly institution designed to give
“the swaddled American husband” a
chance to escape from home one night
in the week. Church, newspaper, club
and lodge afford a supply of ready-made
phrases which pass muster for principles
as well as for conversation.

Yet stirring sluggishly in Babbitt’s
blood are a spirit of revolt, a regard for
justice, and a love of freedom. He does
not want to join the Good Citizens’
League, and he refuses to be coerced
into membership. He does not like the
word “Vigilante,” or the thing it represents.
[Pg 72]

His own sane instinct rejects the
tyranny of the conservative rich and of
the anarchical poor. He dimly respects
Seneca Doane and Professor Brockbank
when he sees them marching in the
strikers’ parade. “Nothing in it for
them, not a cent!” But his distaste for
the strikers themselves, for any body of
men who obstruct the pleasant ways of
prosperity, remains unchanged. In the
end—and it is an end which comes
quickly—he finds that the one thing
unendurable to his soul is isolation.
Cut off from the thought currents of his
group, he is chilled, lonely, and beset
by a vague uneasiness. He yields, and
he yields without a pang, glad to get
back into the warm familiar atmosphere
of class complacency, of smugness, of
“safety first”; glad to sacrifice a wavering
idealism and a purposeless independence
for the solid substance of
smooth living and conformity to his
neighbours’ point of view.

[Pg 73]

The curious thing about Mr. Lewis’s
analysis is that back of the contempt
he strives to awaken in our souls is a
suspicion that Babbitt’s herd mind, the
mind of many thousands of Americans,
is, on the whole, a safe mind for the
country. It will not raise us to any
intellectual or spiritual heights, but
neither will it plunge us into ruin. It is
not making trouble for itself, or for the
rest of the world. In its dull, imperfect
way it represents the static forces of
society. Sudden and violent change is
hostile to its spirit. It may be trusted
to create a certain measure of commercial
prosperity, to provide work for
workers, and safety for securities. It is
not without regard for education, and
it delights in practical science—the
science which speeds transit, or which
collects, preserves and distributes the
noises of the world. It permits artists
and authors to earn their daily bread,
which is as much as artists and authors
[Pg 74]

have any business to expect, and which
is a very precious privilege. In revolutionary
Russia, the intelligentsia were
the first to starve, an unpleasant reminder
of possibilities.

What Mr. Lewis implies is that, outside
of the herd mind he is considering,
may be found understanding and a
sense of fair play. But this is an unwarranted
assumption. The intelligence
of the country—and of the
world—is a limited quantity; and
fair play is less characteristic of groups
than of individuals. Katharine Fullerton
Gerould, in an immensely discontented
paper entitled “The Land of the
Free,” presents the reverse of Mr.
Lewis’s medal. She contends that, as a
people, we have “learned fear,” and
that, while England has kept the traditions
of freedom (a point on which Mr.
Chesterton vehemently disagrees with
her), we are content with its rhetoric.
But she finds us terrorized by labour as
[Pg 75]

well as by capital, by reformers and
theorists as well as by the unbudging
conservative. Fanatics, she says, are
no longer negligible. They have learned
how to control votes by organizing
ignorance and hysteria. “In company
with your most intimate friends you
may lift amused eyebrows over the
Fundamentalists, over the anti-cigarette
organization, over the film censors,
over the people who wish to shape our
foreign policy in the interests of Methodism,
over the people who wish to cut
‘The Merchant of Venice’ out of school
editions of Shakespeare. But it is only
in company with your most intimate
friends that you can do this. If you do
it in public, you are going to be persecuted.
You are sure, at the very least,
to be called ‘un-American.’”

It is a bearable misfortune to be
called un-American, because the phrase
still waits analysis. The only sure way
to escape it is by stepping warily—as
[Pg 76]

in an egg-dance—among the complicated
interests sacred to democracies.
The agile egg-dancer, aware that there
is nothing in the world so sensitive as
a voter (Shelley’s coddled plant was
a hardy annual by comparison), discountenances
plain speech on any subject,
as liable to awaken antagonism.
There is no telling whom it may hit, and
there is no calculating the return blows.
“To covet the truth is a very distinguished
passion,” observes Santayana.
It has burned in the bosom of
man, but not in the corporate bosoms of
municipalities and legislative bodies. A
world of vested interests is not a world
which welcomes the disruptive force of
candour.

The plain-speaker may, for example,
offend the Jews; and nothing can be
more manifestly unwise than to give
umbrage to a people, thin-skinned,
powerful and clannish, who hold the
purse-strings of the country. Look
[Pg 77]

what happened to Sargent’s fresco in
the Boston Library, which angered the
Synagogue it inadequately represented.
Or he may offend the Irish, who control
wards, and councils, and local elections;
and who, being always prompt to retaliate,
are best kept in a good humour.
Or he may offend either the Methodists
or the Roman Catholics, powerful
factors in politics, both of them, and
capable of dealing knock-down blows.
A presidential election was once lost
and won through an unpardonable affront
to Catholicism; and are we not
now drinking soda-fountain beverages
in obedience to the mandates of religious
bodies, of which the Methodists
are the most closely organized and
aggressive?

It is well to consider these things, and
the American press does very soberly
and seriously consider them. The Boston
“Transcript” ventured, it is true,
to protest against the ruling of the
[Pg 78]

Navy Department which gave to Jewish
seamen of the ancient faith three
days’ leave of absence, from the thirty-first
of March, 1923, to the second of
April, with such “additional time” as
was practicable, that they might attend
the rites of the Synagogue; while
Gentile seamen of the Christian faith
enjoyed no such religious privileges.
The newspapers in general, however,
discreetly avoided this issue. “Life”
pointed out with a chuckle that the
people who disapproved of President
Lowell’s decision to exclude negroes
from the Harvard Freshman dormitories
“rose up and slammed him”;
while the people who approved were
“less vocal.” When Rear Admiral
Sims said disconcertingly: “The Kentucky
is not a battleship at all. She is
the worst crime in naval construction
ever perpetrated by the white race”;
even those reviewers who admitted that
the Admiral knew a battleship when he
[Pg 79]

saw one, were more ready to soften his
words than to uphold them.

The negro is a man and a brother.
He is also a voter, and as such merits
consideration. There is no more popular
appeal throughout the length and
breadth of the North than that of fairness
to the coloured citizen. Volumes
have been written about his rights; but
who save President Roosevelt ever
linked responsibilities with rights, duties
with deliverance? Who, at least,
save President Roosevelt ever paused
in the midst of a scathing denunciation
of the crime of lynching (a stain on the
Nation’s honour and a blight on the
Nation’s rectitude) to remind the black
man that his part of the contract was to
deliver up the felon to justice, that his
duty to his country, his race, and his
manhood was to refuse all sanctuary to
crime? A few years ago an acute negro
policeman in Philadelphia recognized
and trapped a negro criminal. For this
[Pg 80]

he received his full measure of commendation;
but he also received threatening
letters from other negroes whose
simple conception of a policeman’s part
was the giving of shelter and protection
to offenders of his own race.

The nastiest bit of hypocrisy ever
put forward by wrong-doers was the
cant of the early slave-dealers about
Christianity and the negroes’ souls.
The slaves were Christianized by thousands,
and took kindly to their new
creed; but their spiritual welfare was
not a controlling factor in the commerce
which supplied the Southern
States with labour. That four fifths of
the labourers were better off in America
than they would have been in Africa
was a circumstance equally unfit to be
offered as a palliative by civilized men.
The inherent injustice of slavery lay
too deep for vindication. But now that
the great wrong has been righted (and
that three hundred thousand white
[Pg 81]

men laid down their lives in the righting
is a fact which deserves to be remembered),
now that the American negroes
are free, Christian, educated, and privileged
(like artists and authors) to earn
their daily bread, they cannot candidly
regret that their remote ancestors had
not been left unmolested on the coast of
Guinea. They have their grievances;
but they are the most fortunate of their
race. The debt the white men owed
them has been paid. There is left a
mutual dependence on the law, a mutual
obligation of self-imposed decency
of behaviour from which not even
voters are exempt.

Timidity is superimposed upon certain
classes of men who are either tied
up with red tape, like teachers, soldiers
and sailors, or unduly dependent upon
other men, like legislators, and like
clerics in those churches which are
strong enough to control the insubordinations
of the pulpit. Of all these
[Pg 82]

classes, legislators are the worst off,
because their dependence is the most
ignoble and disastrous. So long as a
future election is the controlling influence
in their lives, they have no alternative
but to truckle to any compact
body of voters that bullies them into
subjection. So long as they take for
their slogan, “We aim to please,” they
must pay out their manhood for the
privilege of pleasing. In 1923 Senator
Borah charged Congress with “organized
cowardice” in the matter of the
soldiers’ bonus. It was a borrowed
phrase neatly refitted. The spectacle of
a body of lawmakers doubling and turning
like a hare in its efforts to satisfy
the servicemen without annoying the
taxpayer struck the Senator—and
others—as the kind of exaggerated
subjection which paves the way to
anarchy.

Timidity was as alien to the soul of
Henry Adams as it is alien to the soul of
[Pg 83]

Admiral Sims. He was not a man who
skirted the hard places on the road, or
who was so busy keeping both feet on
the ground that he feared to take a
step. But he was conscious of the inquisitorial
spirit which is part of the
righteousness of America, and which
keeps watch and ward over all the
schooling of the country. “Education,”
he wrote, “like politics, is a rough
affair, and every instructor has to shut
his eyes and hold his tongue as though
he were a priest.”

The policy of shutting one’s eyes and
holding one’s tongue is highly esteemed
in all professions, and in all departments
of public service. The man who
can hear black called white without
fussily suggesting that perhaps it is
only grey; the man who evades responsibility,
and eschews inside criticism
(like the criticism of a battleship by an
admiral); the man who never tells an
unpalatable truth “at the wrong time”
[Pg 84]

(the right time has yet to be discovered),
is the man whose success in life is fairly
well assured. There is an optimism
which nobly anticipates the eventual
triumph of great moral laws, and there
is an optimism which cheerfully tolerates
unworthiness. The first belongs to
brave and lonely men; the second is the
endearing quality of men whose sagging
energy and cautious content can be
trusted to make no trouble for their
kind.

The plain-speaking of soldiers and
sailors is reprobated and punished, but
their discretion is less conspicuously
rewarded. They are expected to be undeviatingly
brave in the field and at
sea; but timorous and heedful when
not engaged in fighting their country’s
enemies. They are at a disadvantage
in times of peace, strait-jacketed by
rules and regulations, regarded with
suspicion by sociologists, with hostility
by pacifists, with jealousy by politicians.
[Pg 85]

A grateful Republic dismisses
the men who fought for her, and cherishes
her army of office-holders. When
General Wood and Admiral Sims spoke
some unpleasant truths, nobody ventured
to call these truths lies; but everybody
said that General Wood and Admiral
Sims were not the proper persons
to speak them. As the proper persons
to speak them never would have spoken
them, the country would have been
spared the discomfort of listening, and
the “common quiet,” which is mankind’s
concern, would have been undisturbed.

So far, then, is Mr. Harold Stearns
right in accusing us as a nation of
timidity. So far, then, is Mrs. Gerould
right in accusing us of exaggerated
prudence. That something akin to
timidity has crept into the hearts of
Englishmen, who are fortified by a long
tradition of freedom and common sense,
is evidenced by the title given to two
[Pg 86]

recent volumes of scholarly, and by no
means revolutionary, papers, “Outspoken
Essays.” Frankness must be
at a discount when it becomes self-conscious,
and constitutes a claim to
regard. The early essayists were fairly
outspoken without calling anybody’s
attention to the fact. The contributors
to those great and grim “Reviews”
which so long held the public ear were
outspoken to the verge of brutality.
A comfortless candour was their long
suit. Never before in the history of
English letters has this quality been
so rare as to be formally adopted and
proclaimed.

Santayana, analyzing the essentials
of independence, comes to the discouraging
conclusion that liberty of
speech and liberty to elect our lawmakers
do not materially help us to
live after our own minds. This he holds
to be the only positive and worthwhile
form of freedom. He aims high.
[Pg 87]

Very few of us can live after our own
minds, because the tyranny of opinion
is reënforced by the tyranny of circumstance.
But none of us can hope to live
after our own minds unless we are free
to speak our own minds; to speak them,
not only in the company of friends
(which is all Mrs. Gerould grants us),
but openly in the market-place; and
not with a blast of defiance, but calmly
as in the exercise of an unquestioned
prerogative. Under no other circumstance
is it possible to say anything of
value or of distinction. Under no other
circumstance can we enjoy the luxury
of self-respect. There is an occasional
affectation of courage and candour on
the part of those who know they are
striking a popular note; but to dare to
be unpopular, “in the best and noblest
sense of a good and noble word,” is to
hold fast to the principles which speeded
the Mayflower to Plymouth Rock, and
Penn to the shores of the Delaware.

[Pg 88]

The Happiness of Writing an
Autobiography

Mr. Edmund Gosse, commenting
on the lack of literary
curiosity in the early years of the
seventeenth century, ascribes it to a
growing desire for real knowledge, to
an increasing seriousness of mind. Men
read travels, history, philosophy, theology.
“There were interesting people
to be met with, but there were no Boswells.
Sir Aston Cokayne mentions
that he knew all the men of his time,
and could have written their lives, had
it been worth his while. Instead of
doing this, the exasperating creature
wrote bad epigrams and dreary tragi-comedies.”

A century later, when literary curiosity
had in some measure revived, Sir
Walter Scott, losing his temper over
Richard Cumberland’s “Memoirs,”
[Pg 89]

wrote of their author in the “Quarterly
Review”: “He has pandered to the
public lust for personal anecdote by
publishing his own life, and the private
history of his acquaintances.”

A better illustration of La Fontaine’s
wisest fable, “The Miller, his Son, and
the Ass,” could not anywhere be found.
The only way to please everybody is to
have no ass; that is, to print nothing,
and leave the world at peace. But as
authorship is a trade by which men
seek to live, they must in some way get
their beast to market, and be criticized
accordingly.

It is probable that the increasing
vogue of biography, the amazing output
of books about men and women of
meagre attainments and flickering celebrity,
sets the modern autobiographer
at work.

“For now the dentist cannot die,

And leave his forceps as of old,

But round him, ere his clay be cold,

Is spun the vast biography.”

[Pg 90]

The astute dentist says very sensibly:
“If there is any money to be made out
of me, why not make it myself? If there
is any gossip to be told about me, why
not tell it myself? If modesty restrains
me from praising myself as highly as I
should expect a biographer to praise
me, prudence dictates the ignoring of
circumstances which an indiscreet biographer
might drag into the light. I am,
to say the least, as safe in my own
hands as I should be in anybody else’s;
and I shall, moreover, enjoy the pleasure
dearest to the heart of man, the
pleasure of talking about myself in the
terms that suit me best.”

Perhaps it is this open-hearted enjoyment
which communicates itself to
the reader, if he has a generous disposition,
and likes to see other people have
a good time. Even the titles of certain
autobiographical works are saturated
with self-appreciation. We can see the
august simper with which a great lady
[Pg 91]

in the days of Charles the Second
headed her manuscript: “A True Relation
of the Birth, Breeding and Life of
Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle.
Written by Herself.” Mr. Theodore
Dreiser’s “A Book About Myself”
sounds like nothing but a loud human
purr. The intimate wording of “Margot
Asquith, An Autobiography,” gives
the key to all the cheerful confidences
that follow. Never before or since has
any book been so much relished by its
author. She makes no foolish pretence
of concealing the pleasure that it gives
her; but passes on with radiant satisfaction
from episode to episode, extracting
from each in turn its full and
flattering significance. The volumes are
as devoid of revelations as of reticence.
If at times they resemble the dance of
the seven veils, the reader is invariably
reassured when the last veil has been
whisked aside, and he sees there is
nothing behind it.

[Pg 92]

The happiness of writing an autobiography
which is going to be published
and read is a simple and comprehensible
emotion. Before books were
invented, men carved on stone something
of a vainglorious nature about
themselves, and expected their subjects,
or their neighbours, to decipher
it. But there is a deeper and subtler
gratification in writing an autobiography
which seeks no immediate public,
and contents itself with the expression
of a profound and indulged egotism.
Marie Bashkirtseff has been reproached
for making the world her father confessor;
but the reproach seems hardly
justified in view of the fact that the
“Journal,” although “meant to be
read,” was never thrust by its author
upon readers, and was not published
until six years after her death. She was,
although barely out of girlhood, as complex
as Mrs. Asquith is simple and
robust. She possessed, moreover, genuine
[Pg 93]

intellectual and artistic gifts. The
immensity of her self-love and self-pity
(she could be more sorry for her own
troubles than anybody who ever lived)
steeped her pages in an ignoble emotionalism.
She was often unhappy;
but she revelled in her unhappiness,
and summoned the Almighty to give
it his serious attention. Her overmastering
interest in herself made writing
about herself a secret and passionate
delight.

There must always be a different
standard for the confessions which, like
Rousseau’s, are made voluntarily to
the world, and the confessions which,
like Mr. Pepys’s, are disinterred by
the world from the caches where the
confessants concealed them. Not content
with writing in a cipher, which
must have been a deal of trouble, the
great diarist confided his most shameless
passages to the additional cover
of Spanish, French, Greek and Latin,
[Pg 94]

thus piquing the curiosity of a public
which likes nothing better than to
penetrate secrets and rifle tombs. He
had been dead one hundred and twenty-two
years before the first part of his
diary was printed. Fifty years later, it
was considerably enlarged. One hundred
and ninety years after the garrulous
Secretary of the Admiralty had
passed into the eternal silences, the
record of his life (of that portion of it
which he deemed worth recording) was
given unreservedly to English readers.
The “Diary” is what it is because of the
manner of the writing. Mr. Lang says
that of all who have gossiped about
themselves, Pepys alone tells the truth.
Naturally. If one does not tell the
truth in a Greek cipher, when shall the
truth be told?

The severe strictures passed by
George Eliot upon autobiographies are
directed against scandal-mongering no
less than against personal outpourings.
[Pg 95]

She could have had the English-speaking
world for a confidant had she consented
to confide to it; but nothing
was less to her liking. She objected to
“volunteered and picked confessions,”
as in their nature insincere, and also as
conveying, directly or indirectly, accusations
against others. Her natural
impulse was to veil her own soul—which
was often sick and sore—from
scrutiny; and, being a person of limited
sympathies, she begrudged her neighbour
the privilege of exhibiting his soul,
sores and all, to the public. The struggle
of human nature “to bury its lowest
faculties,” over which she cast unbroken
silence, is what the egotist
wants to reveal, and the public wants to
observe. When Nietzsche says debonairly
of himself, “I have had no experience
of religious difficulties, and have
never known what it was to feel sinful,”
the statement, though probably untrue,
creates at once an atmosphere of flatness.
[Pg 96]

It is what Walt Whitman ardently
admired in beasts—

“They do not lie awake in the dark, and weep for their sins,

They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God.”

Next to the pleasure of writing lovingly
about ourselves—but not comparable
to it—is the pleasure of writing
unlovingly about our fellows. Next
to the joy of the egotist is the joy of the
detractor. I think that the last years
of Saint-Simon, those sad impoverished
years when he lived forgotten by his
world, must have been tremendously
cheered by the certainty that, sooner or
later, the public would read his memoirs.
Nobody knows with what patient
labour, and from what devious sources
he collected his material; but we can all
divine the secret zest with which he
penned his brilliant, malicious, sympathetic,
truth-telling pages. Thirty
years after his death some of these
[Pg 97]

pages crept cautiously into print; but a
full hundred years had passed before
the whole text was given to the world.
Perhaps the dying French gentleman
anticipated no earlier resurrection for
his buried manuscript; but he knew his
nation and he knew his work. The nation
and the work were bound to meet.

A somewhat similar satisfaction must
have stolen into the heart of Charles
Greville when he wrote the last pages of
his diary, and laid it aside for future
publication. Nineteenth-century England
presented none of the restrictions
common to eighteenth-century France;
and ten years after Greville’s death the
first instalment of the ever-famous
“Memoirs” exploded like a bomb in
the serried ranks of British official and
fashionable life. It shook, not the
security, but the complacency of the
Queen on her throne. It was an intelligent
and impartial picture of the
times; and there is nothing that people
[Pg 98]

like less than to be intelligently and
impartially described. Moreover, the
writer was no anonymous critic whose
words came unweighted by authority,
no mere man of letters whom men of
affairs could ignore. He had lived in
the heart of administrative England,
and he knew whereof he spoke.

Lord Hervey’s memoirs are not autobiographical
at all: they are historical,
like the memoirs of Sully, and Jean
de Joinville, and Philippe de Comines.
They are very properly entitled “Memoirs
of the Reign of George the Second,”
and what their author did not know
about that interesting reign (as seen
from the angle of the Court) was not
worth the knowing. Historians have
made free use of his material; and some
of those to whom it has been most
valuable, like Thackeray, have harshly
depreciated the chronicler. Dr. Jowett,
in a moment of cynical misgiving, said
that every amusing story must of
[Pg 99]

necessity be unkind, untrue, or immoral.
Hervey’s stories are not untrue,
and not often immoral; but they

are
unkind. What did he see about him
of which he could consistently write
with kindness? His sharpest thrusts
have a careless quality which redeems
them from the charge of vindictiveness.
When he says of Frederick, Prince of
Wales, “He was as false as his capacity
would allow him to be,” it sounds like
an observation passed with casual unconcern
upon a natural phenomenon
which had chanced to come under his
notice.

Sully was a maker of history as well
as a writer of history. He had no taste
and no time for self-analysis, and, like
Joinville, he had the rare good fortune
to serve a master whom he sincerely
loved and admired. Comines also admired
his master, but he did not love
him. Nobody has yet been put on record
as loving Louis the Eleventh. All
[Pg 100]

these men wrote with candour and acumen.
No pleasure which they can have
taken in compiling their memoirs can
equal, or even approach, the pleasure
with which we read them. Their accuracy
is the accuracy of the observer,
not of the antiquarian. “In my opinion,”
writes Comines, “you who lived
in the age when these affairs were transacted
have no need to be informed of
the exact hours when everything was
done.” “I now make known to my
readers,” observes Joinville composedly,
“that all they shall find in this
book which I have declared I have seen
and known, is true, and what they
ought most firmly to believe. As for
such things as I have mentioned as
hearsay, they may understand them
as they please.”

These excursions into the diversified
region of the memoir lead us away
from the straight and narrow path of
the autobiography. These saunterings
[Pg 101]

along the pleasant byways of history
distract us from the consideration of the
human soul, as shown us by its too
ecstatic possessor. We know as much
as we need to know about the souls of
Lord Hervey, and Sully, and of the Sire
de Joinville, which was really a beautiful
article; but we know a great deal
more about the souls of George the
Second, and Henry of Navarre, and of
Saint Louis, shining starlike through
the centuries. What we gain is better
worth having than what we lose.

When we read the true autobiography,
as that of Benvenuto Cellini,
we see the august men of the period
assume a secondary place, a shadowy
significance. They patronize the artist
or imprison him, according to their
bent. They give him purses of five hundred
ducats when they are complacent,
and they banish him from their very
limited domains when he kills somebody
whom they prefer to keep alive.
[Pg 102]

But not for one moment is our attention
distracted from the narrator himself
to these rude arbiters of fate. He
makes it plain to us from the start that
he is penning his autobiography in a
spirit of composed enjoyment, and because
he deems it “incumbent upon upright
men who have performed anything
noble or praiseworthy to record
with their own hand the events of their
lives.” He tells us in detail how it
pleased God that he should come into
the world; and he tells us of all that he
has done to make God’s action in the
matter a source of regret, as well as
of satisfaction, to others. Those true
words of Frederick the Great, “On peut
apprendre de bonnes choses d’un
scélérat,” are singularly applicable to
this particular rascal. It is as difficult
to find standards by which to appraise
his worth as it is to find rules by which
to test his accuracy. Just as it has been
said of Rousseau, that even in the very
[Pg 103]

ecstasy of truth-telling he does not tell
the truth, so it may be said of Cellini,
that even in the very ecstasy of lying
he does not wholly lie.

It is characteristic of a simpler age
than the one we live in now that autobiographers
sang their own praises candidly
and lustily. Cellini puts graceful
eulogies of himself into the mouths
of his contemporaries, which is one
way, and a very good way, of getting
them said. The Duchesse de Montpensier
(La Grande Mademoiselle)
goes a step further, and assures us that
the Creator is sympathetically aware
of her merits and importance. “I may
say without vanity that just Heaven
would not bestow such a woman as I
am upon a man who was unworthy of
her.” Wilhelmina, Margravine of Baireuth,
and sister of Frederick the Great,
writes with composure: “Happily my
good disposition was stronger than the
bad example of my governess”; and, as
[Pg 104]

the testimony of the governess was not
taken, Wilhelmina’s carries the day.

This directness contrasts pleasantly
with the more involved, and possibly
more judicious, methods employed by
memoir-writers like Richard Lovell
Edgeworth, father of the immortal
Maria, and by autobiographers like
Harriet Martineau. Mr. Edgeworth,
recounting his first experience of married
life, says with conscious nobility:
“I felt the inconvenience of an early
and hasty marriage; and though I
heartily repented of my folly, I determined
to bear with fortitude and
temper the evil I had brought upon
myself.”

Miss Martineau, whose voluminous
work is ranked by Anna Robeson Burr
as among the great autobiographies
of the world, does not condescend to
naïveté; but she never forgets, or permits
her reader to forget, what a
superior person she is. When Miss
[Pg 105]

Aiken ventures to congratulate her
upon her “success” in London society,
she loftily repudiates the word. Success
implies endeavour, and she (Harriet
Martineau) has “nothing to strive
for in any such direction.” When she
sails for the United States, it is with
the avowed purpose of “self-discipline.”
She has become “too much accustomed
to luxury,” and seeks for wholesome
hardships. It sounds a trifle far-fetched.
Byron—an incomparable traveller—admits
that folks who go “a-pleasuring”
in the world must not ask for
comfort; but even Byron did not visit
the East in order to be uncomfortable.
He was not hunting a corrective for St.
James Street and Piccadilly.

There is no finer example in the
world of the happiness of writing an
autobiography than that afforded us
by Miss Martineau. Her book is a real
book, not an ephemeral piece of self-flattery.
Her enjoyment of it is so
[Pg 106]

intense that it impedes her progress.
She cannot get on with her narrative
because of the delight of lingering.
Every circumstance of an uneventful
childhood invites her attention. Other
little girls cry now and then. Mothers
and nurserymaids are aware of this
fact. Other little girls hate to get up in
the morning. Other little girls are occasionally
impertinent to their parents.
But no one else has ever recorded these
details with such serious and sympathetic
concern. A petulant word from
an older sister (most of us have lived
through something of the kind) made
her resolve “never to tell anybody
anything again.” This resolution was
broken. She has told everybody everything,
and the telling must have given
her days, and weeks, and months of
undiluted pleasure.

Miss Martineau’s life was in the main
a successful one. It is natural that she
should have liked to think about it, and
[Pg 107]

write about it. But Mrs. Oliphant, a
far more brilliant woman, was overburdened,
overworked, always anxious,
and often very unhappy. Arthur Young
was a melancholy, disgruntled man,
at odds with himself, his surroundings,
and the world. The painter,
Haydon, lived through years so harassed
by poverty, so untempered by
discretion, so embittered by disappointments,
that his tragic suicide was the
only thing which could have brought
his manifold miseries to an end. Yet
Mrs. Oliphant took comfort in setting
forth her difficulties, and in expressing
a reasonable self-pity. Arthur Young
relieved his mind by a well-worked-out
system of intensive grumbling. Even
Haydon seems to have sought and
found a dreary solace in the recital of
his woes. The fragment of autobiography
is painful to read, but was evidently
the one poor consolation of its
writer’s life.

[Pg 108]

That George Sand’s “Histoire de Ma
Vie” afforded its author more than her
proper share of contentment is evidenced
by its length, and by the relish
which is stamped on every page. Sir
Leslie Stephen pronounced it the best
autobiography he had ever read. It
seems to have delighted him as Rousseau’s
“Confessions” delighted Emerson;
which goes to prove that intellectual
kinship need not necessarily be
accompanied by any similarity of taste.
“If we would really know our hearts,”
says Bishop Wilson, “let us impartially
review our actions.” George Sand and
Rousseau reviewed their actions with
the fondest solicitude; but were biased
in their own favour. Gibbon reviewed
his actions, and such emotions as he
was aware of, with an impartiality that
staggers us; but his heart, at no time
an intrusive organ, gave him little concern.
Franklin, with whom truth-telling
was never an “ecstasy,” but a natural
[Pg 109]

process like breathing and eating,
reviewed his actions candidly, if not
altogether impartially, and left the record
without boast, or apology, or the
reticence dictated by taste, to the judgment
of coming generations. He was a
busy man, engaged, like Sully, in making
history on a large scale. It pleased
him, not only to write his recollections,
but to bequeath them, as he bequeathed
so much else, to the young nation that
he loved. He never sought to patent
his inventions. He never sought to
publish his autobiography. His large
outlook embraced the future, and
America was his residuary legatee.

John Wesley kept a journal for
fifty-five years. This is one of the most
amazing facts in the history of letters.
He was beyond comparison the hardest
worker of his day. John Stuart Mill,
who knew too much and did too much
for any one man, also wrote an autobiography,
which the reading world
[Pg 110]

has been content to ignore. But Mill’s
failing health compelled him sometimes
to rest. Wesley never rested. It
is estimated that for over thirty years
he rode, on an average, eight thousand
miles a year. He preached in his lifetime
full thirty thousand sermons—an
overwhelming and relentless figure.
He wrestled with lagging Churchmen
of the Establishment no less than with
zealous Antinomians, Swedenborgians,
Necessitarians, Anabaptists and Quakers.
Other records of human endeavour
read like the idling of a summer day
alongside of his supernatural activities.
Yet so great is the compulsion of the
born diarist to confide to the world the
history of his thoughts and deeds that
Wesley found time—or took time—to
write, in a minute, cryptic short-hand,
a diary which fills seven large
volumes. He not only wanted to do
this; he
had
to do it. The narrative,
now bald and itemized, now stirring
[Pg 111]

and spirited, now poignant and terrible,
was part of himself. He might have
said of it more truly than Walt Whitman
said of “Leaves of Grass,” that
whoever laid hold upon the book laid
hold upon a man.

To ask that the autobiographer
should “know himself as a realist, and
deal with himself as an artist,” is one
way of demanding perfection. Realists
are plentiful, and their ranks are freshly
recruited every year. Artists are rare,
and grow always rarer in an age which
lacks the freedom, the serenity, the
sense of proportion, essential to their
development. It has happened from
time to time that a single powerful
and sustained emotion has forced from
a reticent nature an unreserved and
illuminating disclosure. Newman’s
“Apologia pro Vita sua” was written
with an avowed purpose—to make
clear the sincerity of his religious life,
and to refute a charge of deceitfulness.
[Pg 112]

The stern coercion which gave it birth,
and which carried it to a triumphant
close, was remote from any sense of
enjoyment save such as might be found
in clarity of thought and distinction of
workmanship. The thrust of truth in
this fragment of autobiography has
carried it far; but it is not by truth alone
that a book lives. It is not by simple
veracity that minds “deeply moralized,
discriminating and sad” have charmed,
and will always charm, the few austere
thinkers and fastidious critics whom a
standardized world has spared.

The pleasure derived by ordinary
readers from memoirs and reminiscences
is twofold. It is the pleasure of
acquiring agreeable information in an
agreeable way, and it is, more rarely,
the pleasure of a direct and penetrating
mental stimulus. “The Education
of Henry Adams” has so filtered
through the intelligent public mind
that echoes of it are still to be heard
[Pg 113]

in serious lectures and flippant after-dinner
speeches. We can, if we are
adroit borrowers, set up intellectual
shop-keeping on Mr. Adams’s stock-in-trade.
We can deal out over our
own counters his essentially marketable
wares.

The simpler delight afforded us by
such a charming book as Frederick
Locker’s “Confidences,” which is not
confidential at all; or by John Murray’s
well-bred “Memoirs of a Publisher”;
or by Lord Broughton’s “Recollections
of a Long Life,” is easy to estimate. We
could ill spare Lord Broughton’s volumes,
both because he tells us things
we do not learn elsewhere, and because
of his illuminating common sense. The
world of authorship has of late years so
occupied itself with Lord Byron that we
wince at the sound of his name. But if
we really want to know him, we must
still turn to Broughton for the knowledge.
The account of Byron’s wedding
[Pg 114]

in the “Recollections” is as unforgettable
as the account of Byron’s funeral in
Moore’s diffuse and rambling “Memoirs.”
It is in such narratives that the
eye-witness eclipses, and must forever
eclipse, the most acute and penetrating
investigator. Biographers cannot stand
as Broughton stood at the door of Seaham,
when the ill-mated couple drove
away to certain misery: “I felt as if I
had buried a friend.” Historians cannot
stand as John Evelyn stood on the
Strand, when the second Charles entered
London: “I beheld him and
blessed God!” Or at Gravesend, seven
years later, when the Dutch fleet lay at
the mouth of the Thames: “A dreadful
spectacle as ever Englishmen saw, and
a dishonour never to be wiped off!”

Ever since that most readable book,
“An Apology for the Life of Mr. Colley
Cibber, Comedian,” was given to the
English world, actors and playwrights
have been indefatigable autobiographers.
[Pg 115]

They may write about themselves
alone, as did Macready, or about
themselves and the world, after the
fashion of Frances Kemble. They may
be amusing, like Ellen Terry, or discursive,
like Augustus Thomas, or
casual, like John Drew. But they fall
into line, and tell us what dramas they
wrote, what companies they managed,
what parts they played, and when and
where they played them, together with
any scraps of theatrical gossip they
may be fortunate enough to recollect.
All, at least, except the once celebrated
Mrs. Inchbald. She recollected so much
that the publisher, Phillips, offered her
a thousand pounds for her manuscript;
and her confessor, a wise and nameless
Catholic priest, persuaded her to burn
it unread. Yet there are people so
perversely minded as to disapprove of
auricular confession.

The golden age of the autobiographer
has come, perhaps to stay. Mr. Howells,
[Pg 116]

observant and sympathetic, welcomed
its dawning, and the fullness of
its promise. He was of the opinion that
this form of composition represented
“the supreme Christian contribution to
literature”; and, while admitting that
there were bad as well as good specimens
of the art, he stoutly maintained
that one more autobiography, however
indifferent, was better than one less—a
disputable point.

The question which confronts the
reading public is this: “How far should
the law of kindness, which we all profess
to follow, influence us in allowing
to our fellow creatures the happiness
of writing books about themselves?”
There is no use saying that it would be
impossible to stop them. Nothing in
the way of inhibitions is impossible to
the United States. “There is no country,”
says the observant Santayana,
“in which people live under more powerful
compulsions.”

[Pg 117]

Americans have so far been inclined
to tolerate the vanity of the autobiography,
because mankind is naturally
vain, and to forgive its dullness, because
life is frequently dull. Moreover, they
are well disposed towards any form of
art or letters that lays claim to the
quality of truth; and it is generally
conceded that a man knows himself
better than others know him. He does
not know, and he never can know, how
he appears to his acquaintances. The
sound of his own voice, the light in
his own eye, his accent, his mannerisms,
his laugh, the sensations, pleasurable
or otherwise, which he produces
by his presence—these things, apparent
to every casual observer, are
unfamiliar to him. But his
naturel
(a
word too expressive for translation)
which others must estimate by the help
of circumstantial evidence, he can, if he
be honest, know and judge.

This, at least, is the theory on which
[Pg 118]

rest the lucidity of art and the weight of
conscience. Yet George Sand, who was
given to self-inspection, self-analysis
and self-applause, admitted the dimness
of her inward vision. “The study
of the human heart,” she wrote, “is of
such a nature, that the more we are absorbed
by it, the less clearly do we see.”

[Pg 119]

Strayed Sympathies

It is probably more instructive to entertain a sneaking
kindness for any unpopular person than to give
way to perfect raptures of moral indignation against
his abstract vices.—
Robert Louis Stevenson.

It is not only more instructive—it
is more enlivening. The conventionalities
of criticism (moral, not literary,
criticism) pass from mouth to mouth,
and from pen to pen, until the iterations
of the press are crystallized in encyclopædias
and biographical dictionaries.
And from such verdicts there is
no appeal. Their laboured impartiality,
their systematic adjustments, their
careful avoidance of intuition, produce
in the public mind a level sameness of
misunderstanding. Many sensible people
think this a good result. Even a
man who did his own thinking, and
maintained his own intellectual free-hold,
like Mr. Bagehot, knew and upheld
[Pg 120]

the value of ruts. He was well
aware how far a little intelligence can be
made to go, unless it aspires to originality.
Therefore he grumbled at the
paradoxes which were somewhat of a
novelty in his day, but which are out-worn
in ours, at the making over of
virtue into vice, and of vice into something
more inspiriting than virtue.
“We have palliations of Tiberius, eulogies
on Henry the Eighth, devotional
exercises to Cromwell, and fulsome adulations
of the first Napoleon.”

That was a half-century ago. To-day,
Tiberius is not so much out of favour as
out of mind; Mr. Froude was the last
man really interested in the moral status
of Henry the Eighth; Mr. Wells has
given us his word for it that Napoleon
was a very ordinary person; and the
English people have erected a statue of
Cromwell close to the Houses of Parliament,
by way of reminding him (in
his appointed place) of the survival of
[Pg 121]

representative government. The twentieth
century does not lean to extravagant
partialities. Its trend is to disparagement,
to searchlights, to that lavish
and ironic candour which no man’s reputation
can survive.

When Mr. Lytton Strachey reversed
Mr. Stevenson’s suggestion, and chose,
as subject-matter of a book, four people
of whom the world had heard little but
good, who had been praised and reverenced
beyond their deserts, but for
whom he cherished a secret and cold
hostility, he experimented successfully
with the latent uncharitableness of
men’s minds. The brilliancy with which
the four essays were written, the keenness
of each assault, the charm and persuasiveness
of the style, delighted even
the uncensorious. The business of a
biographer, said the author in a very
engaging preface, is to maintain his own
freedom of spirit, and lay bare events
as he understands them, “dispassionately,
[Pg 122]

impartially, and without ulterior
intentions.”

It sounds fair and square; but the
fact remains that Mr. Strachey disliked
Manning, despised Arnold, had little
sympathy with Gordon, and no great
fancy for Florence Nightingale. It
must be remembered also that in three
cases out of four he was dealing with
persons of stubborn character and compelling
will, as far removed from irreproachable
excellence as from criminality.
Of such, much criticism may be
offered; but the only way to keep an
open outlook is to ask, “What was their
life’s job?” “How well did they do it?”
Men and women who have a pressing
job on hand (Florence Nightingale was

all
job) cannot afford to cultivate the
minor virtues. They move with an irresistible
impulse to their goal. It is
a curious fact that Mr. Strachey is
never so illuminating as when he turns
his back upon these forceful and disconcerting
[Pg 123]

personages, and dallies with
their more amenable contemporaries.
What he writes about Gordon we should
be glad to forget; what he writes about
Sir Evelyn Baring and Lord Hartington
we hope to remember while we live.

The popularity of “Eminent Victorians”
inspired a host of followers.
Critics began to look about them for
other vulnerable reputations. Mr. J. A.
Strahan, stepping back from Victoria
to Anne, made the happy discovery
that Addison had been systematically
overpraised, and that every side of his
character was open to assault. The result
of this perspicuity is a damning
denunciation of a man whom his contemporaries
liked and esteemed, and
concerning whom we have been content
to take the word of those who knew him.
He may have been, as Mr. Strahan asserts,
a sot, a time-server, a toad-eater,
a bad official and a worse friend; but
he managed to give a different impression.
[Pg 124]

Addison’s friends and neighbours
found him a modest, honourable, sweet-tempered
gentleman; and Steele, whom
he had affronted, wrote these generous
words: “You can seldom get him to the
tavern; but when once he is arrived to
his pint, and begins to look about him,
you admire a thousand things in him
which before lay buried.”

This seems to me a singularly pleasant
thing to say about anybody. Were
I coveting praise, this is the form I’d
like the praise to take.

The pressure of disparagement, which
is one result of the cooling of our blood
after the fever-heat of war, is lowering
our enthusiasms, thinning our sympathies,
and giving us nothing very
dazzling in the way of enlightenment.
Americans are less critical than Englishmen,
who so value their birthright of
free speech that censure of public men
has become a habit, a game of hazard
(pulling planks out of the ship of state),
[Pg 125]

at which long practice has made them
perfect. “The editor of the ‘Morning
Post,’” observed Mr. Maurice Hewlett
wearily, “begins his day by wondering
whom he shall denounce”; and opposing
editors, as nimble at the fray,
match outcry against outcry, and malice
against malignity.

I doubt if any other than an Englishman
could have written “The Mirrors
of Downing Street,” and I am sure that,
were an American able to write such a
book (which is problematic), it would
never occur to him to think of it, or to
brag of it, as a duty. The public actions
of public men are open to discussion;
but Mr. Balfour’s personal selfishness,
his parsimony, his indifference to his
domestics, are not matters of general
moment. To gossip about these things
is to gossip with tradesmen and servants.
To deny to Lord Kitchener
“greatness of mind, greatness of character,
and greatness of heart,” is harsh
[Pg 126]

speaking of the dead; but to tell a gaping
world that the woman “whom he
loved hungrily and doggedly, and to
whom he proposed several times, could
never bring herself to marry him,” is
a personality which “Town Topics”
would scorn. “The Mirrors of Downing
Street” aspired to a moral purpose;
but taste is the guardian of morality.
Its delicate and severe dictates define
the terms upon which we may improve
the world at the expense of our neighbour’s
character.

The sneaking kindness recommended
by Mr. Stevenson is much harder to
come by than the “raptures of moral
indignation,” of which he heard more
than he wanted, and which are reverberating
through the world to-day. The
pages of history are heavy with moral
indignation. We teach it in our schools,
and there are historians like Macaulay
who thunder it rapturously, with never
a moment of misgiving. But here and
[Pg 127]

there, as we step apprehensively into
historic bypaths, we are cheered by
patches of sunshine, straight glimpses
into truths which put a more credible,
because a more merciful, construction
upon men’s actions, and lighten our
burden of dispraise.

I have often wondered why, with
Philippe de Commines as an avenue
of approach, all writers except Scott
should deal with Louis the Eleventh as
with a moral monstrosity. Commines is
no apologist. He has a natural desire
to speak well of his master; but he reviews
every side of Louis’s character
with dispassionate sincerity.

First, as a Catholic: “The king was
very liberal to the Church, and, in some
respects, more so than was necessary,
for he robbed the poor to give to the
rich. But in this world no one can arrive
at perfection.”

Next, as a husband: “As for ladies,
he never meddled with them in my
[Pg 128]

time; for when I came to his court he
lost a son, at whose death he was
greatly afflicted; and he made a vow to
God in my presence never to have intercourse
with any other woman than
the queen. And though this was no
more than he was bound to do by the
canons of the Church, yet it was much
that he should have such self-command
as to persevere firmly in his resolution,
considering that the queen (though an
excellent lady in other respects) was
not a princess in whom a man could
take any great delight.”

Finally, as a ruler: “The king was
naturally kind and indulgent to persons
of mean estate, and hostile to all great
men who had no need of him.... But
this I say boldly in his commendation,
that in my whole life I never knew any
man so wise in his misfortunes.”

To be brave in misfortune is to be
worthy of manhood; to be wise in misfortune
is to conquer fate. We cannot
[Pg 129]

easily or advantageously regard Louis
with affection; but when Commines epitomizes
history in an ejaculation, “Our
good master, Louis, whom God pardon!”
it rests our souls to say, “Amen!”

We cannot easily love Swift. The
great “professional hater” frightens us
out of the timid regard which we should
like—in honour of English literature—to
cherish for his memory. But there is
a noble sentence of Thackeray’s which,
if it does not soften our hearts, cannot
fail to clarify our minds, to free us from
the stupid, clogging misapprehension
which we confuse with moral distaste.
“Through the storms and tempests of
his [Swift’s] furious mind the stars of
religion and love break out in the blue,
shining serenely, though hidden by the
driving clouds and maddening hurricane
of his life.” One clear and penetrating
note (“Childe Roland to the
Dark Tower came”) is worth much
careful auditing of accounts.

[Pg 130]

The picture of John Wilkes drawn
by Sir George Otto Trevelyan in his
“Early History of Charles James Fox,”
and the picture of Aaron Burr drawn by
Mr. Albert J. Beveridge in his “Life of
John Marshall,” are happy illustrations
of unpopular subjects treated with
illuminating kindness. Wilkes was a
demagogue and Burr a trouble-maker
(the terms are not necessarily synonymous),
and neither of them is a man
whose history is widely or accurately
known. Both historians are swayed by
their political passions. An historian
without political passions is as rare as
a wasp without a sting. To Trevelyan
all Conservatives were in fault, and all
Liberals in the right. Opposition to
George the Third is the acid test he
applies to separate gold from dross.
Mr. Beveridge regards the Federalists
as the strength, and the Republicans as
the weakness, of the young nation.
Thomas Jefferson is
his
test, and a man
[Pg 131]

hated and hounded by Jefferson necessarily
wins his support.

Nevertheless, Wilkes and Burr are
presented to us by their sympathizers
in a cold north light which softens and
conceals nothing. Men of positive
quality, they look best when clearly
seen. “Research and fact are ever in
collision with fancy and legend,” observes
Mr. Beveridge soberly; and it is
to research and fact that he trusts to
rescue his accomplished filibuster from
those unproved charges which live by
virtue of their vagueness. Writers of
American school histories, remembering
the duty of moral indignation, have
played havoc with the reputation of
Aaron Burr; and American school-children,
if they know him at all, know
him as a duellist and a traitor. They
are sure about the duel (it was one of
the few facts firmly established in my
own mind after a severe struggle with
American history); but concerning the
[Pg 132]

treason, they are at least as ill-informed
as their elders.

British children do better, perhaps,
with John Wilkes. Little Londoners
can gaze at the obelisk which commemorates
his mayoralty, and think of
him as a catless Whittington. The slogan
“Wilkes and Liberty” has an attractive
ring to all who are not of
Madame Roland’s way of thinking.
No man ever gave his partisans more to
defend, or his opponents better chances
to attack; and friends and foes rose
repeatedly and fervently to their opportunities.
A century later, Sir George
Trevelyan, a friend well worth the having,
reviews the case with wise sincerity,
undaunted confidence, a careful art in
the arrangement of his high lights, and
a niceness of touch which wins halfway
all readers who love the English language.
Wilkes was as naturally and
inevitably in debt as was William Godwin,
and Wilkes’s debts were as naturally
[Pg 133]

and inevitably paid by some one
else as were Godwin’s; but when Trevelyan
alludes softly to his “unambitious
standard of solvency,” this sordid
detail becomes unexpectedly pleasurable.
So easily are transgressions pardoned,
if they provoke the shadow of a
smile.

Lord Rosebery’s “Napoleon: the Last
Phase” is a work nobly conceived and
admirably executed; but its impelling
motive is an austere resolve to make
what amends a single Englishman can
make for an ungenerous episode in English
history. Its sympathy for a fallen
foe bears no likeness to the sympathy
which impelled Théodore de Banville,
broken in health and hope by the siege
of Paris, to write a lyric in memory of a
young Prussian officer, a mere boy,
who was found dead on the field, with a
blood-stained volume of Pindar in his
tunic. Lord Rosebery’s book is written
with a proud sadness, a stern indignation,
[Pg 134]

eminently fitted to its subject;
but he is not so much kind as just.
Napoleon is too vast a figure to be approached
with benevolence. It is true,
as Mr. Wells asserts, that, had he been
unselfish and conscientious, he would
never have conquered Europe; but only
Mr. Wells is prepared to say that a lack
of these qualities won him renown. He
shares the lack with Wilhelm the Second,
who has had neither an Austerlitz
nor a Waterloo.

There is a wide assortment of unpopular
characters whose company it
would be very instructive to keep.
They belong to all ages, countries and
creeds. Spain alone offers us three
splendid examples—the Duke of Alva,
Cardinal Ximenez, and Philip the Second.
Alva, like the Corsair, possessed
one virtue, which was a more valuable
virtue than the Corsair’s, but brings
him in less credit, because the object of
his unswerving loyalty and devotion
[Pg 135]

was not a guileless lady, but a sovereign,
less popular, if possible, than himself.
Cardinal Ximenez, soldier, statesman,
scholar, priest, ascetic, author and
educator, was also Grand Inquisitor,
and this fact alone seems to linger in
the minds of men. That, for his day, he
was a moderate, avails him little. That
he made a point of protecting scholars
and professors from the pernicious
interference of the Inquisition ought to
avail him a great deal. It might were
it better known. There is a play of Sardou’s
in which he is represented as concentrating
all the deadly powers of his
office against the knowledge which he
most esteemed. This is the way the
drama educates.

And Philip? It would be a big piece
of work to win for Philip even a partial
recognition of his moderate merits. The
hand of history has dealt heavily with
him, and romance has preyed upon his
vitals. In fact, history and romance are
[Pg 136]

undistinguishable when they give free
play to the moral indignation he inspires.
It is not enough to accuse him
of the murder of the son whom he hated
(though not more heartily than George
the Second hated the Prince of Wales):
they would have us understand that he
probably poisoned the brother whom
he loved. “Don John’s ambitions had
become troublesome, and he ceased to
live at an opportune moment for Philip’s
peace of mind,” is the fashion in
which Gayarré insinuates his suspicions;
and Gayarré’s narrative—very
popular in my youth—was recommended
to the American public by
Bancroft, who, I am convinced, never
read it. Had he penetrated to the
eleventh page, where Philip is alluded
to as the Christian Tiberius, or to the
twentieth, where he is compared to an
Indian idol, he would have known that,
whatever the book might be, it was not
history, and that, as an historian, it ill
[Pg 137]

became him to tell innocent Americans
to read it.

But how were they to be better informed?
Motley will not even allow
that Philip’s fanatical devotion to his
Church was a sincere devotion. He accuses
him of hypocrisy, which is like
accusing Cromwell of levity, or Burke
of Jacobinism. Prescott has a fashion of
turning the King’s few amiabilities, as,
for example, his tenderness for his third
wife, Isabella of France, into a suggestion
of reproach. “Well would it be for
the memory of Philip, could the historian
find no heavier sin to lay to his
charge than his treatment of Isabella.”
Well would it be for all of us, could the
recording angel lay no heavier charge
to our account than our legitimate affections.
The Prince of Orange, it is
true, charged Philip with murdering
both wife and son; but that was merely
a political argument. He would as soon
have charged him with the murder of
[Pg 138]

his father, had the Emperor not been
safely isolated at Yuste; and Philip, in
return, banned the Prince of Orange—a
brave and wise ruler—as “an enemy
of the human race.”

Twenty-five years ago, an Englishman
who was by nature distrustful of
popular verdicts, and who had made
careful studies of certain epochs of
Spanish history, ventured to paint
Philip in fresh colours. Mr. Martin
Hume’s monograph shows us a cultivated
gentleman, with a correct taste
in architecture and art, sober, abstemious,
kind to petitioners, loyal and affectionate
to his friends, generous to his
soldiers and sailors; a man beloved by
his own household, and reverenced by
his subjects, to whom he brought nothing
but misfortune. The book makes
melancholy reading, because Philip’s
political sins were also political blunders;
his mad intolerance was a distortion,
rather than a rejection, of conscience;
[Pg 139]

and his inconceivable rigidity
left him helpless to face the essential
readjustments of life. “I could not do
otherwise than I have done,” he said
with piercing sincerity, “though the
world should fall in ruins around me.”

Now what befell Mr. Hume who
wrote history in this fashion, with no
more liking for Philip than for Elizabeth
or the Prince of Orange, but with
a natural desire to get within the purlieus
of truth? Certain empty honours
were conferred upon him: a degree from
Cambridge, membership in a few societies,
the privilege of having some letters
printed after his name. But the University
of Glasgow and the University
of Liverpool stoutly refused to give him
the chairs of history and Spanish. He
might know more than most men on
these subjects; but they did not want
their students exposed to new impressions.
The good old way for them. Mr.
Hume, being a reader, may have recalled
[Pg 140]

in bitterness of spirit the words of the
acute and unemotional Sully, who had
scant regard for Catholicism (though
the Huguenots tried him sorely), and
none at all for Spain; but who said, in
his balanced, impersonal way, that
Philip’s finer qualities, his patience,
piety, fortitude and single-mindedness,
were all alike “lost on the vulgar.”

Lucrezia Borgia is less available for
our purpose, because the imaginary
Lucrezia, though not precisely beloved,
is more popular in her way than the real
Lucrezia could ever hope to be. “In the
matter of pleasantness,” says Lucian,
“truth is far surpassed by falsehood”;
and never has it been more agreeably
overshadowed than in this fragment of
Italian history. We really could not
bear to lose the Lucrezia of romance.
She has done fatigue duty along every
line of iniquity. She has specialized in
all of the seven deadly sins. On Rossetti’s
canvas, in Donizetti’s opera, in Victor
[Pg 141]

Hugo’s play, in countless poems
and stories and novels, she has erred
exhaustively for our entertainment.
The image of an attractive young
woman poisoning her supper guests is
one which the world will not lightly let
go.

And what is offered in return? Only
the dull statements of people who
chanced to know the lady, and who
considered her a model wife and duchess,
a little over-anxious about the education
of her numerous children, but
kind to the poor, generous to artists,
and pitiful to Jews. “She is graceful,
modest, lovable, decorous and devout,”
wrote Johannes Lucas from Rome to
Ercole, the old Duke of Ferrara. “She
is beautiful and good, gentle and amiable,”
echoed the Chevalier Bayard
years later. Were we less avid for thrills,
we might like to think of this young
creature, snatched at twenty-one from
the maelstrom of Rome, where she had
[Pg 142]

been a pawn in the game of politics, and
placed in a secure and splendid home.
The Lucrezia of romance would have
found the court of Ferrara intolerably
dull. The Lucrezia of history took to
dullness as a duck to water. She was a
sensible, rather than a brilliant woman,
fully alive to the duties and dignities of
her position, and well aware that respectability
is a strong card to play in
a vastly disreputable world.

There was a time when Robespierre
and Marat made a high bid for unpopularity.
Even those who clearly understood
the rehabilitation of man in the
French Revolution found little to say
for its chosen instruments, whose purposes
were high, but whose methods
were open to reproach. Of late, however,
a certain weariness has been observable
in men’s minds when these reformers
are in question, a reluctance to
expand with
any
emotion where they
are concerned. M. Lauzanne is, indeed,
[Pg 143]

by way of thinking that the elemental
Clemenceau closely resembles the elemental
Robespierre; but this is not a serious
valuation; it is letting picturesqueness
run away with reason—a habit
incidental to editorship.

The thoroughly modern point of view
is that Robespierre and Marat were ineffective;
not without ability in their
respective lines, but unfitted for the
parts they played. Marat’s turn of
mind was scientific (our own Benjamin
Franklin found him full of promise).
Robespierre’s turn of mind was legal;
he would have made an acute and successful
lawyer. The Revolution came
along and ruined both these lives, for
which we are expected to be sorry. M.
Lauzanne does not go so far as to say
that the Great War ruined Clemenceau’s
life. The “Tiger” was seventy-three
when the Germans marched into
Belgium. Had he been content to spend
all his years teaching in a girls’ school,
[Pg 144]

he might (though I am none too sure
of it) have been a gentler and a better
man. But France was surely worth
the price he paid. A lifeboat is not expected
to have the graceful lines of a
gondola.

“Almost everybody,” says Stevenson,
“can understand and sympathize
with an admiral, or a prize-fighter”;
which genial sentiment is less contagious
now than when it was uttered,
thirty years ago. A new type of admiral
has presented itself to the troubled
consciousness of men, a type unknown
to Nelson, unsuspected by Farragut,
unsung by Newbolt. In robbing the
word of its ancient glory, Tirpitz has
robbed us of an emotion we can ill-afford
to lose. “The traditions of
sailors,” says Mr. Shane Leslie, “have
been untouched by the lowering of
ideals which has invaded every other
class and profession.” The truth of his
words was brought home to readers by
[Pg 145]

the behaviour of the British merchant
marine, peaceful, poorly paid men, who
in the years of peril went out unflinchingly,
and as a matter of course, to meet
“their duty and their death.” Many
and varied are the transgressions of
seafaring men; but we have hitherto
been able to believe them sound in their
nobler parts. We should like to cherish
this simple faith, and, though alienated
from prize-fighters by the narrowness of
our civic and social code, to retain our
sympathy for admirals. It cannot be
that their fair fame will be forever
smirched by the tactics of a man who
ruined the government he served.

The function of criticism is to clear
our mental horizon, to get us within
close range of the criticized. It recognizes
moral as well as intellectual issues;
but it differentiates them. When
Emerson said, “Goethe can never be
dear to men. His is not even the devotion
to pure truth, but to truth for the
[Pg 146]

sake of culture,” he implied that truth,
besides being a better thing than culture,
was also a more lovable thing,
which is not the case. It takes temerity
to love Goethe; but there are always
men—young, keen, speculative,
beauty-loving men—to whom he is
inexpressibly dear because of the vistas
he opens, the thoughts he releases, the
“inward freedom” which is all he
claimed to give. It takes no less temerity
to love Emerson, and he meant that
it should be so, that we should climb
high to reach him. He is not lovable
as Lamb is lovable, and he would not
have wanted to be. A man who all his
life repelled unwelcome intimacies had
no desire to surrender his memory to
the affection of every idle reader.

It is such a sure thing to appeal from
intelligence to the moral sense, from
the trouble involved in understanding
to the ease with which judgment is
passed, that critics may be pardoned
[Pg 147]

their frequent misapprehensions. Problems
of conduct are just as puzzling as
problems of intellect. That is why Mr.
Stevenson pronounced a sneaking kindness
to be “instructive.” He offered it
as a road to knowledge rather than as a
means of enjoyment. Not that he was
unaware of the pleasures which follow
in its wake. He knew the world up and
down well enough to be thankful that
he had never lost his taste for bad
company.

[Pg 148]

The Divineness of Discontent

When a distinguished Oxford student
told Americans, through
the distinguished medium of Harvard
College, that they were “speeding with
invincible optimism down the road to
destruction,” they paid him the formal
compliment of listening to, and commenting
upon, his words. They did not
go so far as to be disturbed by them,
because it is the nature of men to remain
unmoved by prophecies. Only
the Greek chorus—or its leader—paid
any heed to Cassandra; and the
folly of Edgar Poe in accepting without
demur the reiterated statement
of his raven is apparent to all readers
of a much-read poem. The world has
been speeding through the centuries
to destruction, and the end is still remote.
Nevertheless, as it is assuredly
not speeding to perfection, the word
[Pg 149]

that chills our irrational content may
do us some small service. It is never
believed, and it is soon forgotten; but
for a time it gives us food for thought.

Any one born as long ago as I was
must remember that the virtue most
deeply inculcated in our nurseries was
content. It had no spiritual basis to
lend it dignity and grace, but was of
a Victorian smugness; though, indeed,
it was not Victorian at all, but an inheritance
from those late Georgian days
which were the smuggest known to
fame. It was a survival from Hannah
More and Jane Taylor, ladies dissimilar
in most respects, but with an equal gift
for restricting the horizon of youth. I
don’t remember who wrote the popular
story of the “Discontented Cat” that
lived in a cottage on bread and milk
and mice, and that made itself unhappy
because a wealthy cat of its
acquaintance was given buttered crumpets
for breakfast; but either Jane
[Pg 150]

Taylor or her sister Ann was responsible
for the “Discontented Pendulum,”
which grew tired of ticking in the dark,
and, being reminded that it had a
window to look through, retorted very
sensibly that there was no use having
a window, if it could not stop a second
to look through it.

The nursery theory of content was
built up on the presumption that you
were the favoured child of fortune—or
of God—while other, and no less
worthy, children were objects of less
kindly solicitude. Miss Taylor’s “Little
Ann” weeps because she sees richly clad
ladies stepping into a coach while she
has to walk; whereupon her mother
points out to her a sick and ragged
beggar child, whose

“naked feet bleed on the stones,”

and with enviable hardness of heart
bids her take comfort in the sight:

“This poor little beggar is hungry and cold,

No father nor mother has she;
[Pg 151]

And while you can daily such objects behold,

You ought quite contented to be.”

Hannah More amplified this theory
of content to fit all classes and circumstances.
She really did feel concern for
her fellow creatures, for the rural poor
upon whom it was not the custom of
Church or State to waste sympathy or
help. She refused to believe that British
labourers were “predestined to be
ignorant and wicked”—which was
to her credit; but she did, apparently,
believe that they were predestined to
be wretchedly poor, and that they
should be content with their poverty.
She lived on the fat of the land, and
left thirty thousand pounds when she
died; but she held that bare existence
was sufficient for a ploughman. She
wrote twenty-four books, which were
twenty-four too many; but she told
the ever-admiring Wilberforce that she
permitted “no writing for the poor.”
She aspired to guide the policies and
[Pg 152]

the morals of England; but she was
perturbed by the thought that under-paid
artisans should seek to be “scholars
and philosophers,” though they
must have stood in more need of philosophy
than she did.

It was Ruskin who jolted his English
readers, and some Americans, out of the
selfish complacency which is degenerate
content. It was he who harshly told
England, then so prosperous and powerful,
that prosperity and power are not
virtues, that they do not indicate the
sanction of the Almighty, or warrant
their possessors in assuming the moral
leadership of the world. It was he
who assured the prim girlhood of my
day that it was not the petted child of
Providence, and that it had no business
to be contented because it was better
off than girlhood elsewhere. “Joy in
nothing that separates you, as by any
strange favour, from your fellow creatures,
that exalts you through their
[Pg 153]

degradation, exempts you from their
toil, or indulges you in times of their
distress.”

This was a new voice falling upon the
attentive ears of youth—a fresh challenge
to its native and impetuous generosity.
Perhaps the beggar’s bare feet
were not a legitimate incentive to
enjoyment of our own neat shoes and
stockings. Perhaps it was a sick world
we lived in, and the beggar was a symptom
of disease. Perhaps when Emerson
(we read Emerson and Carlyle as
well as Ruskin) defined discontent as an
infirmity of the will, he was thinking of
personal and petty discontent, as with
one’s breakfast or the weather; not
with the discontent which we never
dared to call divine, but which we
dimly perceived to have in it some noble
attribute of grace. That the bare
existence of a moral law should so exalt
a spirit that neither sin nor sorrow
could subdue its gladness was a profundity
[Pg 154]

which the immature mind
could not be expected to grasp.

Time and circumstance lent themselves
with extraordinary graciousness
to Emerson’s invincible optimism. It
was easier to be a transcendental philosopher,
and much easier to cherish a
noble and a sweet content, before the
laying of the Atlantic cable. Emerson
was over sixty when this event took
place, and, while he lived, the wires
were used with commendable economy.
The morning newspaper did not bring
him a detailed account of the latest
Turkish massacre. The morning mail
did not bring him photographs of starving
Russian children. His temperamental
composure met with little to
derange it. He abhorred slavery; but
until Lincoln forced the issue, he seldom
bent his mind to its consideration. He
loved “potential America”; but he had
a happy faculty of disregarding public
affairs. Passionate partisanship, which
[Pg 155]

is the basis of so much satisfaction
and discontent, was alien to his soul.
He loved mankind, but not men; and
his avoidance of intimacies saved him
much wear and tear. Mr. Brownell says
that he did not care enough about his
friends to discriminate between them,
which was the reason he estimated
Alcott so highly.

This immense power of withdrawal,
this concentration upon the things of
the spirit, made possible Emerson’s intellectual
life. He may have been, as
Santayana says, “impervious to the
evidence of evil”; yet there breaks from
his heart an occasional sigh over the
low ebb of the world’s virtue, or an
entirely human admission that the
hopes of the morning are followed by
the ennui of noon. Sustained by the
supremacy of the moral law, and by a
profound and majestic belief in the
invincible justice, the “loaded dice” of
God, he sums up in careful words his
[Pg 156]

modest faith in man: “Hours of sanity
and consideration are always arriving
to communities as to individuals, when
the truth is seen, and the martyrs are
justified.” Perhaps martyrs foresee the
dawning of this day or ever they come
to die; but to those who stand by
and witness their martyrdom, the night
seems dark and long.

There is a species of discontent which
is more fervently optimistic than all the
cheerfulness the world can boast. It is
the discontent of the passionate and
unpractical reformer, who believes, as
Shelley believed, in the perfectibility of
the human species, and who thinks, as
Shelley thought, that there is a remedy
for every disease of civilization. To
the poet’s dreaming eyes the cure was
simple and sure. Destruction implied
for him an automatic reconstruction,
a miraculous survival and rebirth. Uncrown
the king, and some noble prophet
or philosopher will guide—not rule—the
[Pg 157]

people. Unfrock the priest, and the
erstwhile congregation will perfect itself
in the practice of virtue. Take the
arms from the soldier and the policeman,
the cap and gown from the college
president, authority from the judge,
and control from the father. The nations
will then be peaceful, the mobs
orderly, the students studious, the
criminals virtuous, the children well-behaved.
An indifferent acquaintance
with sociology, and a comprehensive
ignorance of biology, made possible
these pleasing illusions. Nor did it
occur to Shelley that many men, his
equals in disinterestedness and his
superiors in self-restraint, would have
found his reconstructed world an eminently
undesirable dwelling-place.

Two counsels to content stand bravely
out from the mass of contradictory
admonitions with which the world’s
teachers have bewildered us. Saint
Paul, writing to the Philippians, says
[Pg 158]

simply: “I have learned, in whatsoever
state I am, therewith to be content”;
and Marcus Aurelius, contemplating
the mighty spectacle of life and death,
bids us pass serenely through our little
space of time, and end our journey in
content. It is the meeting-point of
objective and subjective consciousness.
The Apostle was having a hard time of
it. The things he disciplined himself
to accept with content were tangible
things, of an admittedly disagreeable
character—hunger and thirst, stripes
and imprisonment. They were not
happening to somebody else; they were
happening to
him
. The Emperor,
seeking refuge from action in thought,
steeled himself against the nobleness
of pity no less than against the weakness
of complaint. John Stuart Mill,
who did not suffer from enervating softness
of heart, pronounced the wholesale
killing of Christians in the reign
of Marcus Aurelius to be one of the
[Pg 159]

world’s great tragedies. It was the outcome,
not only of imperial policy, but
of sincere conviction. Therefore historians
have agreed to pass it lightly by.
How can a man do better than follow
the dictates of his own conscience, or
of his own judgment, or of whatever
directs the mighty ones of earth who
make laws instead of obeying them?
But the immensity of pain, the long-drawn
agony involved in this protracted
persecution might have disturbed
even a Stoic philosopher passing
serenely—though not harmlessly—through
his little space of time.

This brings me to the consideration
of one prolific source of discontent, the
habit we have acquired—and cannot
let go—of distressing ourselves over
the daily progress of events. The
classic world, “innocent of any essential
defeat,” was a pitiless world, too
clear-eyed for illusions, too intelligent
for sedatives. The Greeks built the
[Pg 160]

structure of their lives upon an almost
perfect understanding of all that it
offered and denied. The Romans, running
an empire and ruling a world, had
much less time for thinking; yet Horace,
observant and acquiescent, undeceived
and undisturbed, is the friend of all the
ages. It is not from him, or from any
classic author, that we learn to talk
about the fret and fever of living. He
would have held such a phrase to be
eminently ill-bred, and unworthy of
man’s estate.

The Middle Ages, immersed in heaving
seas of trouble, and lifted Heaven-ward
by great spiritual emotions, had
scant breathing-space for the cultivation
of nerves. Men endured life and
enjoyed it. Their endurance and their
enjoyment were unimpaired by the violence
of their fellow men, or by the
vision of an angry God. Cruelty, which
we cannot bear to read about, and a
Hell, which we will not bear to think
[Pg 161]

about, failed signally to curb the zest
with which they lived their days. “How
high the tide of human delight rose in
the Middle Ages,” says Mr. Chesterton
significantly, “we know only by the
colossal walls they built to keep it
within bounds.” There is no reason to
suppose that Dante, whose fervid faith
compassed the redemption of mankind,
disliked his dream of Hell, or that it
irked him to consign to it so many
eminent and agreeable people.

The Renaissance gave itself unreservedly
to all the pleasures that could
be extracted from the business of living,
though there was no lack of troubles
to damp its zeal. It is interesting and
instructive to read the history of a great
Italian lady, typical of her day, Isabella
d’Este, Marchioness of Mantua.
She was learned, adroit, able, estimable,
and mistress of herself though duchies
fell. She danced serenely at the ball
given by the French King at Milan,
[Pg 162]

after he had ousted her brother-in-law,
the Duke Ludovico, and sent him to
die a prisoner at Loches. When Cæsar
Borgia snatched Urbino, she improved
the occasion by promptly begging from
him two beautiful statues which she
had always coveted, and which had
been the most treasured possessions of
Duke Guidobaldo, her relative, and the
husband of her dearest friend. A chilly
heart had Isabella when others came
to grief, but a stout one when disaster
faced her way. If the men and women
who lived through those highly coloured,
harshly governed days had fretted too
persistently over the misfortunes of
others, or had spent their time questioning
the moral intelligibility of life,
the Renaissance would have failed of
its fruition, and the world would be a
less engaging place for us to live in
now.

There is a discontent which is profoundly
stimulating, and there is a
[Pg 163]

discontent which is more wearisome
than complacency. Both spring from a
consciousness that the time is out of
joint, and both have a modern background
of nerves. “The Education
of Henry Adams” and the “Diaries”
of Wilfrid Scawen Blunt are cases in
point. Blunt’s quarrel was with his
country, his world, his fellow creatures
and his God—a broad field of dissatisfaction,
which was yet too narrow to
embrace himself. Nowhere does he
give any token of even a moderate self-distrust.
Britain is an “engine of evil,”
because his party is out of power.
“Americans” (in 1900) “are spending
fifty millions a year in slaughtering
the Filipinos”—a crude estimate of
work and cost. “The Press is the most
complete engine ever invented for the
concealment of historic truth.” “Patriotism
is the virtue of nations in decay.”
“The whole white race is revelling
openly in violence, as though it
[Pg 164]

had never pretended to be Christian.
God’s equal curse be on them all.”

“The whole white race,” be it observed.
For a time Blunt dreamed fond
dreams of yellow and brown and black
supremacy. Europe’s civilization he esteemed
a failure. Christianity had not
come up to his expectations. There
remained the civilization of the East,
and Mohammedanism—an amended
Mohammedanism, innocent of sensuality
and averse to bloodshed. Filled
with this happy hope, the Englishman
set off from Cairo to seek religion in the
desert.

Siwah gave him a rude reception.
Ragged tribes, ardent but unregenerate
followers of the Prophet, pulled down
his tents, pillaged his luggage, robbed
his servants, and knocked him rudely
about. Blunt’s rage at this treatment
was like the rage of “Punch’s” vegetarian
who is chased by a bull. “There
is no hope to be found in Islam, and I
[Pg 165]

shall go no further,” is his conclusion.
“The less religion in the world, perhaps
the better.”

Humanity and its creeds being thus
disposed of, there remained only the animals
to contemplate with satisfaction.
“Three quarters of man’s misery,” says
the diary, “comes from pretending to
be what he is not, a separate creation,
superior to that of the beasts and birds,
when in reality they are wiser than we
are, and infinitely happier.”

This is the kind of thing Walt Whitman
used now and then to say, though
neither he nor Sir Wilfrid knew any
more about the happiness of beasts and
birds than do the rest of us. But that
brave old hopeful, Whitman, would
have laughed his loudest over Blunt’s
final analysis of the situation: “All the
world would be a paradise in twenty
years if man could be shut out.” A
paradise already imaged by Lord Holland
and the poet Gray:

[Pg 166]

“Owls would have hooted in Saint Peter’s choir,

And foxes stunk and littered in Saint Paul’s.”

To turn from these pages of pettish
and puerile complaint to the deep-seated
discontent of Henry Adams is
to reënter the world of the intellect.
Mark Pattison confessed that he could
not take a train without thinking how
much better the time-table might have
been planned. It was an unhappy twist
of mind; but the Rector of Lincoln
utilized his obtrusive critical faculties
by applying them to his own labours,
and scourging himself to greater effort.
So did Henry Adams, though even the
greater effort left him profoundly dissatisfied.
He was unelated by success,
and he could not reconcile himself to
that degree of failure which is the common
portion of mankind. His criticisms
are lucid, balanced, enlightening, and
occasionally prophetic, as when he
comments on the Irishman’s political
passion for obstructing even himself,
[Pg 167]

and on the perilous race-inertia of Russia.
“Could inertia on such a scale be
broken up, or take new scale?” he asks
dismayed; and we read the answer to-day.
A minority ruling with iron hand;
a majority accepting what comes to
them, as they accept day and night and
the seasons.

If there is not an understatement in
the five hundred pages of the “Education,”
which thereby loses the power of
persuasion, there is everywhere an appeal
to man’s austere equity and disciplined
reason. Adams was not in love
with reason. He said that the mind
resorted to it for want of training, and
he admitted that he had never met a
perfectly trained mind. But it was the
very essence of reason which made him
see that friends were good to him, and
the world not unkind; that the loveliness
of the country about Washington
gave him pleasure, even when he found
“a personal grief in every tree”; and
[Pg 168]

that a self-respecting man refrains from
finding wordy fault with the conditions
under which he lives. He did not believe,
with Wordsworth, that nature
is a holy and beneficent thing, or with
Blake, that nature is a wicked and malevolent
thing; but he knew better
than to put up a quarrel with an invincible
antagonist. He erred in supposing
that other thoughtful men were
as discontented as he was, or that disgust
with the methods of Congress corroded
their hours of leisure; but he expressed
clearly and with moderation
his unwillingness to cherish “complete
and archaic deceits,” or to live in a
world of illusions. His summing up is
the summing up of another austere and
uncompromising thinker, Santayana,
when confronted by the same problem:
“A spirit with any honour is not willing
to live except in its own way; a spirit
with any wisdom is not over-eager to
live at all.”

[Pg 169]

As our eagerness and our reluctance
are not controlling factors in the situation,
it is unwise to stress them too
heavily. Yet we must think, at least
some of us must; and it is well to think
out as clearly as we can, not the relative
advantages of content and discontent—a
question which briskly answers
itself—but the relative rightness.
Emerson believed in the essential goodness
of life, in the admirable law of
compensation. Santayana believes that
life has evil for its condition, and is for
that reason profoundly sad and equivocal.
He sees in the sensuous enjoyment
of the Greek, the industrial optimism
of the American, only a “thin
disguise for despair.” Yet Emerson
and Santayana reach the same general
conclusion. The first says that hours
of sanity and consideration come to
communities as to individuals, “when
the truth is seen, and the martyrs are
justified”; the second that “people in
[Pg 170]

all ages sometimes achieve what they
have set their hearts on,” and that, if
our will and conduct were better disciplined,
“contentment would be more
frequent and more massive.”

It is hard to think of these years of
grace as a chosen period of sanity and
consideration; and the hearts of the
Turk and the Muscovite are set on
things which do not make for the massive
contentment of the world. The
orderly processes of civilization have
been so wrenched and shattered that
readjustment is blocked at some point
in every land, in our own no less than
in others. There are those who say
that the World War went beyond the
bounds of human endurance; and that
the peculiar horror engendered by indecent
methods of attack—poison-gases,
high explosives and corrosive
fluids—has dimmed the faith and
broken the spirit of men. But Attila
managed to turn a fair proportion of
[Pg 171]

the civilized world into wasteland, with
only man-power as a destructive force.
Europe to-day is by comparison unscathed,
and there are kinsfolk dwelling
upon peaceful continents to whom
she may legitimately call for aid.

Legitimately, unless our content is
like the content extolled by Little
Ann’s mother; unless our shoes and
stockings are indicative of God’s meaningless
partiality, and unless the contemplation
of our neighbour’s bleeding
feet enhances our pious satisfaction. “I
doubt,” says Mr. Wells sourly, “if it
would make any very serious difference
for some time in the ordinary daily life
of Kansas City, if all Europe were reduced
to a desert in the next five years.”
Why Kansas City should have been
chosen as the symbol of unconcern, I
do not know; but space has a deadening
influence on pity as on fear. The
farther we travel from the Atlantic
coast, the more tepid is the sympathy
[Pg 172]

for injured France. The farther we
travel from the Pacific coast, the fainter
is the prejudice against Japan.

It may be possible to construct a
state in which men will be content with
their own lot, if they be reasonable, and
with their neighbours’ lot, if they be
generous. It is manifestly impossible
to construct a world on this principle.
Therefore there will always be a latent
grief in the nobler part of man’s soul.
Therefore there will always be a content
as impious as the discontent from
which Pope prayed to be absolved.

The unbroken cheerfulness, no less
than the personal neatness, of the
British prisoners in the World War
astounded the more temperamental
Germans. Long, long ago it was said
of England: “Even our condemned
persons doe goe cheerfullie to their
deths, for our nature is free, stout,
hautie, prodigal of life and blood.” This
heroic strain, tempered to an endurance
[Pg 173]

which is free from the waste of emotionalism,
produces the outward semblance
and the inward self-respect of
a content which circumstances render
impossible. It keeps the soul of man
immune from whatever degradation his
body may be suffering. It saves the
land that bred him from the stigma of
defeat. It is remotely and humanly
akin to the tranquillity of the great
Apostle in a Roman prison. It is wholly
alien to the sin of smugness which has
crept in among the domestic virtues,
and rendered them more distasteful
than ever to austere thinkers, and to
those lonely, generous souls who starve
in the midst of plenty.

There is a curious and suggestive
paragraph in Mr. Chesterton’s volume
of loose ends, entitled “What I Saw in
America.” It arrests our attention because,
for once, the writer seems to be
groping for a thought instead of juggling
with one. He recognizes a keen
[Pg 174]

and charming quality in American
women, and is disturbed because he
also recognizes a recoil from it in his
own spirit. This is manifestly perplexing.
“To complain of people for
being brave and bright and kind and
intelligent may not unreasonably appear
unreasonable. And yet there is
something in the background that can
be expressed only by a symbol; something
that is not shallowness, but a
neglect of the subconscious, and the
vaguer and slower impulses; something
that can be missed amid all that
laughter and light, under those starry
candelabra of the ideals of the happy
virtues. Sometimes it came over me in
a wordless wave that I should like to
see a sulky woman. How she would
walk in beauty like the night, and
reveal more silent spaces full of older
stars! These things cannot be conveyed
in their delicate proportion, even in the
most large and elusive terms.”

[Pg 175]

Baudelaire has conveyed them measurably
in four words:

“Sois belle! Sois triste!”

Yet neither “sulky” nor “triste” is an
adjective suggesting with perfect felicity
the undercurrent of discontent which
lends worth to courage and charm to
intelligence. Back of all our lives is
the sombre setting of a world ill at
ease, and beset by perils. Darkening
all our days is the gathering cloud
of ill-will, the ugly hatred of man for
man, which is the perpetual threat to
progress. We Americans may not be
so invincibly optimistic as our critics
think us, and we may not yet be “speeding”
down the road to destruction, as
our critics painfully foretell; but we are
part of an endangered civilization, and
cannot hold up our end, unsupported
by Europe. An American woman, cautiously
investing her money in government
bonds, said to her man of business:
[Pg 176]

“These at least are perfectly secure?”
“I should not say that,” was
the guarded reply; “but they will be the
last things to go.”

A few years ago there was a period
that saw the workingmen and working-women
of the United States engaged in
three hundred and sixty-five strikes—one
for every day of the year—and
all of them on at once. Something
seems lacking in the equity of our industrial
life. The “Current History”
of the New York “Times” is responsible
for the statement that eighty-five
thousand men and women met their
deaths by violence in the United States
during the past decade. Something
seems lacking in our programme of
peace.

Can it be that Mr. Wells is right when
he says that the American believes in
peace, but feels under no passionate urgency
to organize it? Does our notable
indifference to the history of the
[Pg 177]

past mean that we are unconcerned
about the history of the present? Two
things are sure. We cannot be nobly
content with our own prosperity, unless
its service to the world is made manifest;
grace before meat is not enough to
bless the food we eat. And we cannot
be nobly content with our unbroken
strength, with the sublimity of size and
numbers, unless there is something correspondingly
sublime in our leadership
of the wounded nations. Our allies, who
saved us and whom we saved, face
the immediate menace of poverty and
assault. They face it with a slowly
gathered courage which we honour to-day,
and may be compelled to emulate
to-morrow. “The fact that fear is rational,”
says Mr. Brownell, “is what
makes fortitude divine.”

[Pg 178]

Allies

“Friendship between princes,”
observed the wise Philippe de
Commines, “is not of long duration.”
He would have said as much of friendship
between republics, had he ever
conceived of representative government.
What he knew was that the
friendships of men, built on affection
and esteem, outlast time; and that the
friendships of nations, built on common
interests, cannot survive the mutability
of those interests, which are always
liable to deflection. He had proof, if
proof were needed, in the invasion of
France by Edward the Fourth under
the pressure of an alliance with Charles
of Burgundy. It was one of the urbane
invasions common to that gentlemanly
age. “Before the King of England
embarked from Dover, he sent one of
his heralds named Garter, a native of
[Pg 179]

Normandy, to the King of France, with
a letter of defiance couched in language
so elegant and so polite that I can
scarcely believe any Englishman wrote
it.”

This was a happy beginning, and the
end was no less felicitous. When Edward
landed in France he found that
Louis the Eleventh, who hated fighting,
was all for peace; and that the Duke
of Burgundy, who generally fought the
wrong people at the wrong time, was
in no condition for war. Therefore he
patched up a profitable truce, and went
back to England, a wiser and a richer
man, on better terms with his enemy
than with his ally. “For where our advantage
lies, there also is our heart.”

The peculiar irritation engendered
by what Americans discreetly designate
as “entangling alliances” was forced
upon my perception in early youth,
when I read the letters of a British
officer engaged in fighting the Ashanti.
[Pg 180]

The war, if it may be so termed, was
fought in 1873, and the letters were
published in “Blackwood’s Magazine.”
The Ashanti had invaded Fantiland,
then under a British protectorate, and
the troops commanded by Sir Garnet
Wolseley were presumably defending
their friends. This particular officer
expressed his sense of the situation in a
fervid hope that when the Ashanti were
beaten, as they deserved to be, the
English would then come to speedy
terms with them, “and drive these
brutes of Fanti off the map.”

It is a sentiment which repeats itself
in more measured terms on every page
of history. The series of “Coalitions”
formed against Napoleon were rich in
super-comic, no less than in super-tragic
elements; and it was well for those
statesmen whose reason and whose
tempers were so controlled that they
were able to perceive the humours of
this giant game of pussy-in-the-corner.
[Pg 181]

A mutual fear of France drew the Allies
together; a mutual distrust of one
another pulled them apart. Sir Gilbert
Elliot, afterwards Lord Minto, endeavoured
from the beginning to make
England understand that Austria would
prefer her own interests to the interests
of the Coalition, and that it was not
unnatural that she should do so. The
situation, as he saw it, was something
like this:

“Austria: ‘If I am to dance to your
tune, you must pay the piper.’

“England: ‘So long as I lead the
figure, and you renounce a
pas seul
.’”

Unfortunately the allurements of a

pas seul
were too strong to be anywhere
resisted. Prices grew stiffer and stiffer,
armies melted away when the time for
action neared. Britain, always victorious
at sea, paid out large sums for small
returns on land. Her position was
briefly summed up by Sir Hugh Elliot—more
brilliant and less astute than
[Pg 182]

his brother—at the hostile Court of
Prussia. Frederick the Great, overhearing
the pious ejaculation with
which the Englishman greeted the arrival
of a satisfactory dispatch from
Sir Eyre Coote, said to him acidly: “I
was not aware that God was also one
of your allies.” “The only one, Sire,
whom we do not finance,” was the
lightning retort.

One more circumstance deserves to
be noted as both familiar and consolatory.
Napoleon’s most formidable purpose
was to empty England’s purse by
waging a commercial war. When he
forbade her exports to the countries he
fancied he controlled, he was promised
implicit obedience. In March, 1801,
Lord Minto wrote serenely to Lord
Grenville: “The trade of England and
the necessities of the Continent will
find each other out in defiance of prohibitions.
Not one of the confederates
will be true to the gang, and I have
[Pg 183]

little doubt of our trade penetrating
into France itself, and thriving in
Paris.”—Which it did.

The comfortable thing about the
study of history is that it inclines us to
think hopefully of our own times. The
despairing tone of contemporary writers
would seem to indicate that the
allied nations that fought and won the
Great War have fallen from some
high pinnacle they never reached to
an abysmal depth they have never
sounded. When Dean Inge recorded in
“The Contemporary Review” his personal
conviction that the war had been
“a ghastly and unnecessary blunder,
which need not have happened, and
ought not to have happened,” this
casual statement was taken up and repeated
on both sides of the Atlantic,
after the exasperating fashion in which
a Greek chorus takes up and repeats in
strophe and antistrophe the most depressing
sentiment of the play. And to
[Pg 184]

what purpose? Did any sane man ever
doubt that Austria’s brutal ultimatum
to Serbia was a ghastly and unnecessary
blunder? Did any sane man ever
doubt that Germany’s invasion of Belgium
was a ghastly and unnecessary
blunder? But if Dean Inge or his sympathizers
knew of any argument, save
that of arms, by which the Central
Powers could have been convinced that
they were blundering, and persuaded
to retrieve their blunder, so that what
ought not to have happened need not
have happened, it is a pity that this
enlightenment was not vouchsafed to
an imperilled world.

It is possible for two boys to build up
a friendship on the basis of a clean fight.
It is possible for two nations to build
up a good understanding on the basis of
a clean fight. The relations between
Great Britain and South Africa constitute
a case in point. Germany’s fighting
was unclean from start to finish.
[Pg 185]

Therefore, while there are many to feel
commiseration for her, there are none
to do her honour. The duration of the
war has little to do with this strong
sentiment of disesteem. Had it lasted
four months instead of four years, the
deeds done in Belgium and in France
would have sterilized the seeds of
friendship in the minds of all who remembered
them. To an abnormal sense
of superiority, Germany added an abnormal
lack of humour, which made her
regard all resistance as an unjustifiable
and unpardonable affront. Her resentment
that Belgians should have
presumed to defend their country was
like the resentment of that famous marauder,
the Earl of Cassillis, when Allan
Stewart refused to be tortured into
signing away his patrimony. “You
are the most obstinate man I ever saw
to oblige me to use you thus,” said
the justly indignant Earl. “I never
thought to have treated any one as
[Pg 186]

your stubbornness has made me treat
you.”

The emotional ebb-tide which followed
the signing of the armistice was
too natural to be deplored, save that it
gave to obstructionists their chance to
decry the matchless heroisms of the
war. No people can be heroic over the
problem of paying debts out of an
empty treasury. Need drives men to
envy as fullness drives them to selfishness.
Bargaining is essential to the life
of the world; but nobody has ever
claimed that it is an ennobling process.
If it were given to debtors to love their
creditors, there would have been no
persecution of the Jews. If it were
given to creditors to love their debtors,
there would be no poverty on earth.
That all the nations, now presumably
on friendly terms, should be following
their own interests would seem to most
of us the normal thing it is, if they did
not so persistently affect to be amazed
[Pg 187]

and grieved at one another’s behaviour,
and if the mischief-makers of every land
were not actively engaged in widening
breaches into chasms.

It is inevitable and logical that the
men who were pacifists when the word
had a sinister meaning should heartily
detest their countries’ allies who helped
them win the war. The English “Nation
and Athenæum” wrote of France
in 1922 as it might have written—but
did not—of Germany in 1914. Poincaré
it likened to Shylock, France to a
butcher eager for the shambles. “French
militarism at work in the Rhineland
is a lash to every evil passion.” “Europe
is kept in social and political disorder
by the sheer selfishness of France.”
“There
was
a France of the mind.
Victory killed it, and a long slow renovation
of the soul must precede its
resurrection.”

Like the ingenuous Mr. Pepys, the
“Nation” does “just naturally hate
[Pg 188]

the French,” and takes it hard that the
world should persistently regard them
as a valuable asset to civilization. The
concentrated nationalism which held
Verdun now expresses itself in a steely
resolution to hold France, and to recover
for her out of the wreckage of
Europe the material aid of which she
stands in need. Coöperation is a good
word and a good thing. To a Frenchman
it means primarily the interest of
his own country. What else does it
mean to any of us? Britain’s policy of
conciliation, our policy of aloofness,
Germany’s bargaining, and Russia’s
giant bluff, all have the same significance.
“Be not deceived! Nothing is
so dear to any creature as his profit,”
said Epictetus, who, having stript his
own soul bare of desires, was correspondingly
ready to forgive the acquisitive
instincts of others.

Mr. Edward Martin, writing very
lucidly and very sympathetically of the
[Pg 189]

French, admits that their conception of
their duty to the world “is to defend
France, keep her functioning, and make
her powerful and prosperous.” It
sounds narrow, and practical, and arrogant.
It also sounds familiar. France
feels herself to be intellectually and
artistically a thing of value. The best
service she can render to the world is
her own preservation. How does America
feel? The very week that Mr.
Martin offered his interpretation of
Gallic nationalism, a writer in the “Review
of Reviews” (New York), after
asserting with indescribable smugness
that Americans “have been trained to
an attitude of philanthropy hardly
known in other countries,” proceeded
to illustrate this attitude by defending
high tariffs, restricted immigration, and
other comforting pieces of legislation.
“Our best service to the world,” he explained,
“lies in maintaining our national
life and character.”

[Pg 190]

This is just what France thinks, only
her most zealous sons forbear to define
prudence as philanthropy. They believe
that the world is the better for
what they have to give; but they know
that it is not for the world’s sake that
they so keenly desire to be in a position
to give it. They are profoundly sentimental,
but their sentiment is all for
la
patrie
. Internationally they are practical
to the point of hardness, and they
see no reason why they should be otherwise.
There is for them no pressing
necessity to assume that they love
their neighbours as themselves.

It is different with Americans in
whom idealism and materialism dispute
every inch of the ground. A Texan
professor, sent by the American Peace
Commission to investigate conditions
in Germany, published in “The North
American Review,” May, 1922, a paper
on “American Ideals and Traditions,”
which was widely quoted as embodying
[Pg 191]

a clear and fervid spirit of hopefulness,
much needed in these disillusioned days.
The writer took the high ground that
Americans were the first people in the
world “to make the spirit of disinterested
human service the measure of a
nation as well as of a man. What is
now termed American humanitarianism
is but the American spirit of philanthropy
at home, translated into international
relations.” This “simple
historical fact” is the key to all our
actions. “The entrance of America
into the Great War was not a species of
interruption in the normal flow of its
idealism; but was the irresistible on-pressing
of the great current of our
‘will to human service.’”

One wonders if this particular idealist
remembers what happened in Europe,
in the United States, and on the high
seas, between July, 1914, and April,
1917? Does he recall those thirty-two
months, close-packed with incidents of
[Pg 192]

such an order that their cumulative
weight broke down our hardy resistance
to “service,” and drove us slowly
but splendidly into action? Great
deeds are based on great emotions; but
the conflicting emotions of that period
are not accurately described as “irresistible.”
The best of them were too
long and too successfully resisted. We
gain no clear impression of events by
thinking in ornamental terms. Headlines
are one thing, and history is
another. “In judging others,” says
Thomas à Kempis, “a man usually
toileth in vain. For the most part he is
mistaken, and he easily sinneth. But
in judging and scrutinizing himself, he
always laboureth with profit.”

The continued use of the word “entangling”
is to be regretted. It arouses
an excess of uneasiness in cautious
souls. All alliances from marriage up—or
down—must necessarily entangle.
The anchorites of Thebais are the
[Pg 193]

only examples we have of complete
emancipation from human bonds. That
simple and beautiful thing, minding
our own affairs and leaving our neighbours
to mind theirs, is unhappily not
possible for allies. Neither is a keen
and common desire for peace a sufficient
basis for agreement. Peace must
have terms, and terms require a basis of
their own—justice, reason, and the
limited gains which are based on mutual
concessions. “Whether we are
peaceful depends upon whether others
are provocative.” Mr. W. H. Mallock
tells us a pleasant story of an old
Devonshire woman who was bidden by
the parson to be “conciliating” to her
husband. “I labour for peace, sir,” was
the spirited reply. “But when I speak
to he thereof, he directly makes hisself
ready for battle.”

There are students of history who
would have us believe that certain nations
are natural allies, fitted by character
[Pg 194]

and temperament to agree, and to
add to one another’s pleasure and
profit. Germany and Russia have been
cited more than once as countries instinctively
well disposed towards each
other, because each supplements the
other’s talents. Bismarck ranked the
Germans as among the male, and the
Slavs as among the female nations of
the world. The driving power he rightfully
assigned to Germany. “The soft
Slav nature,” says a writer in “The
New Republic,” “emotional, sensitive,
but undisciplined, has derived most of
such progress as it has made in material
civilization from German sources.”

Both countries have proved unsound
allies, and Russia has the feminine
quality of changeableness. “Dangerous
to her foes, disastrous to her
friends.” Both make the same kind of
currency, and stand in need of business
partners who make a different sort.
America, with the gold of Europe
[Pg 195]

locked up in her treasury, is the most
desirable, but least accessible, partner
in Christendom. As the great creditor
of the civilized world, she has been impelled
to assert that no participation
on her part in any international conference
implies a surrender of her
claims to payment. France, as the
great sufferer by a world’s war, has
made it equally clear that no participation
on
her
part implies a surrender of
her claims to reparation. The anger
and shame with which the Allies first
saw the injuries inflicted on her have
been softened by time; and that strange
twist in human nature which makes
men more concerned for the welfare of
a criminal than for the welfare of his
victim has disposed us to think kindly
of an unrepentant Germany. But
France cannot well forget the wounds
from which she bleeds. Less proud
than Britain, which prefers beggary
to debt, she is infinitely more logical;
[Pg 196]

and it is the unassailable strength of
her position which has irritated the
sentimentalists of the world, whose
hearts are in the right place, but whose
heads are commonly elsewhere.

The French press has waxed sorrowful
and bitter over France’s sense of
isolation. Her cherished belief in the
“unshakable American friendship” has
been cruelly shattered, and she has
asked of Heaven and earth where is the
(proverbially absent) gratitude of republics.
That there is no such thing as
an unshakable national friendship is
as well known to the clear-headed and
well-informed French as to the rest of
us. They were our very good friends in
1777, and our love for them flamed high.
They were our very bad friends in 1797,
and by the time they had taken or sunk
three hundred and forty American
ships, our affection had grown cool. It
revived in 1914 under the impetus of
their great wrongs and greater valour.
[Pg 197]

Some good feeling remains, and bids
fair to remain, if the press and the
politicians of both lands will kindly
let it alone; but popular enthusiasm, a
fire of straw, burned itself quickly out.
After all, we ourselves are no longer the
idol of our whilom friends. A fairy god-mother
is popular only when she is
changing pumpkins into coaches, and
mice into prancing bays. When she
gives nothing but good advice, her
words are no more golden than her
neighbour’s. In the realm of the practical,
a friendship which does not help,
and an enmity which does not hurt,
can never be controlling factors.

Great Britain sets scant store by any
ally save the sea. She has journeyed
far, changing friends on the road as a
traveller by post changed horses. She
has fought her way, and is singularly
devoid of rancour towards her enemies.
The time has indeed gone by when,
after battle, the English and French
[Pg 198]

knights—or what was left of them—would
thank each other for a good fight.
Those were days of lamentable darkness,
when the last thing a gentleman
craved was the privilege of dying in his
bed by some slow and agonizing process,
the gift of nature, and gratefully
designated as “natural.” The headsman
for the noble, the hangman for the
churl, and the fortunes of war for everybody,
made death so easy to come by,
and so inexpensive, that there was a
great deal of money left for the pleasures
of living. That stout-hearted
Earl of Northumberland who thanked
God that for two hundred years no
head of his house had died in bed,
knew what his progenitors had been
spared. Even in the soberly civilized
eighteenth century there lingered a
doubt as to the relative value of battle-field,
gallows and sick-chamber.

“Men may escape from rope and gun,

Some
have outlived the doctor’s pill;”

[Pg 199]

sang Captain Macheath to the fashionable
world which thronged to hear the
verities of “The Beggar’s Opera.”

Fighting and making up, alternate
friends and foes, the nations of Europe
have come in a thousand years to know
one another fairly well. There was a
short time when Napoleon’s threatened
invasion awakened in England’s breast
a hearty and healthy abhorrence of
France. There was a long time when
the phrase, “virgin of English,” applied
to a few perilously placed French
seaports (Saint-Malo, for example), revealed,
as only such proud and burning
words can ever reveal, the national
hatred of England. Over and over
again history taught the same lesson;
that the will of a people is stout to repel
the invader, and that a foreign alliance
offers no stable foundation for policy.
But a great deal is learned from
contact, whether it be friendly or inimical;
and the close call of the Great War
[Pg 200]

has left behind it a legacy of percipience.
It was an Englishman who discovered
during those years that the
French officers snored “with a certain
politeness.” It was a great American
who said that France had “saved the
soul of the world.” It was a Frenchman
who wrote comprehensively: “To disregard
danger, to stand under fire, is not
for an Englishman an act of courage; it
is part of a good education.” When
gratitude is forgotten, as all things
which clamour for remembrance should
be, and sentimentalism has dissolved
under the pitiless rays of reality, there
remains, and will remain, a good understanding
which is the basis of good will.

At present the nations that were
drawn together by a common peril are
a little tired of one another’s company,
and more than a little irritated by one
another’s grievances. The natural result
of this weariness and irritation is
an increase of sympathy for Germany,
[Pg 201]

who now finds herself detested by her
former allies, and smiled upon by at
least some of her former foes. All that
she says, and she has a great deal to
say, is listened to urbanely. General
Ludendorff has assured the American
public that Prussia was innocent of
even a desire to injure England. What
she sought was peace “on conditions
acceptable and inoffensive to both parties.”
The Crown Prince’s memoirs,
which have been appreciatively reviewed,
set forth in eloquent language
the Arthurian blamelessness of the
Hohenzollerns. “The results of the excessive
Viennese demand upon Serbia
involved us in the war against our will.”

The breathless competition for the
memoirs of the exiled Kaiser was a notable
event in the publishing world.
The history of literature can show nothing
to resemble it. In 1918 we gravely
discussed the propriety of trying this
gentleman for his life. In 1922 we contended
[Pg 202]

with far more heat for the
privilege of presenting to a gratified
public his imperial views upon his imperial
policy. Americans exulted over
the acquisition of these copyrights as
they exulted over the acquisition of the
Blue Boy. It is a grand thing to be able
to outbid one’s neighbour, and pay a
“record-smashing” price for any article
in the market. Certain inflexible and
unhumorous souls took umbrage at this
catering to a principle we professed to
reject, at the elevation of Wilhelm the
Second to the rank of the world’s most
favoured author. They thought it implied
a denial of all we reverenced, of
all we fought for, of all we knew to be
good. It really implied nothing but curiosity;
and curiosity is not to be confounded
with homage. Saint Michael
is honoured of men and angels; but if
he and Lucifer gave their memoirs to
the world, which would be better paid
for, or more read?

[Pg 203]

They Had Their Day

“To a man,” says an engaging
cynic in Mr. Stephen McKenna’s
“Sonia,” “sex is an incident: to a
woman it is everything in this world
and in the next”; a generalization which
a novelist can always illustrate with a
heroine who meets his views. We have
had many such women in recent fiction,
and it takes some discernment to perceive
that in them sex seems everything,
only because honour and integrity
and fair-mindedness are nothing.
They are not swept by emotions good
or bad; but when all concern for other
people’s rights and privileges is eliminated,
a great deal of room is left for
the uneasy development of appetites
which may be called by any name we
like.

Among the Georgian and early-Victorian
novelists, Richardson alone
[Pg 204]

stands as an earnest and pitiless expositor
of sex. He slipped as far away
from it as he could in “Sir Charles Grandison,”
but in doing so he slipped away
from reality. The grossness of Fielding’s
men is not intrinsic; it is, as Mr.
McKenna would say, incidental. Jane
Austen, who never wrote of things with
which she was unfamiliar, gave the
passions a wide berth. Scott was too
robustly masculine, and Dickens too
hopelessly and helplessly humorous, to
deal with them intelligently. Thackeray
dipped deep into the strong tide
of life, and was concerned with all its
eddying currents. Woman was to him
what she was not to Scott, “une grande
réalité comme la guerre”; and, like
war, she had her complications. He
found these complications to be for the
most part distasteful; but he never assumed
that a single key could open all
the chambers of her soul.

When Mrs. Ritchie said of Jane
[Pg 205]

Austen’s heroines that they have “a
certain gentle self-respect, and humour,
and hardness of heart,” she must have
had Emma in her mind. Humour
hardens the heart, at least to the point
of sanity; and Emma surveys her little
world of Highbury very much as Miss
Austen surveyed her little world of
Steventon and Chawton, with a less
piercing intelligence, but with the same
appreciation of foibles, and the same
unqualified acceptance of tedium. To a
modern reader, the most striking thing
about the life depicted in all these
novels is its dullness. The men have
occupations of some sort, the women
have none. They live in the country,
or in country towns. Of outdoor sports
they know nothing. They walk when
the lanes are not too muddy, and some
of them ride. They play round games
in the evening, and always for a stake.
A dinner or a dance is an event in their
lives; and as for acting, we know what
[Pg 206]

magnificent proportions
it
assumes
when we are told that even to Henry
Crawford, “in all the riot of his gratifications,
it was as yet an untasted
pleasure.”

Emma, during the thirteen months
in which we enjoy her acquaintance,
finds plenty of mischief for her idle
hands to do. Her unwarranted interference
in the love affairs of two people
whom it is her plain business to let alone
is the fruit of ennui. Young, rich,
nimble of wit and sound of heart, she
lives through days and nights of inconceivable
stupidity. She does not ride,
and we have Mr. Knightley’s word for
it that she does not read. She can
sketch, but one drawing in thirteen
months is the sum of her accomplishment.
She may possibly have a regard
for the “moral scenery” which Hannah
More condescended to admire; but nature
is neither law nor impulse to her
soul. She knows little or nothing of the
[Pg 207]

country about her own home. It takes
the enterprising Mrs. Elton to get her
as far as Box Hill, a drive of seven
miles, though the view it commands
is so fine as to provoke “a burst of admiration”
from beholders who have
apparently never taken the trouble to
look at it before. “We are a very quiet
set of people,” observes Emma in complacent
defence of this apathy, “more
disposed to stay at home than engage
in schemes of pleasure.”

Dr. Johnson’s definition of a novel
as “a smooth tale, generally of love,”
fits Miss Austen well. It is not that she
assigns to love a heavy rôle; but there
is nothing to interfere with its command
of the situation. Vague yearnings,
tempestuous doubts, combative principles,
play no part in her well-ordered
world. The poor and the oppressed are
discreetly excluded from its precincts.
Emma does not teach the orphan boy
to read, or the orphan girl to sew. She
[Pg 208]

looks after her father’s comfort, and
plays backgammon with him in the
evenings. Of politics she knows nothing,
and the most complicated social
problem she is called on to face is the
recognition, or the rejection, of her less
fashionable neighbours. Are, or are
not, the Coles sufficiently genteel to
warrant her dining with them? Highbury
is her universe, and no restless
discontent haunts her with waking
dreams of the Tiber and the Nile.
Frank Churchill may go to London,
sixteen miles off, to get his hair cut;
but Emma remains at Hartfield, and
holds the centre of the stage. We can
count the days, we can almost count
the hours in her monotonous life. She
is unemotional, even for her setting;
and it was after reading her placid
history that Charlotte Brontë wrote
the memorable depreciation of all Miss
Austen’s novels.

But, though beset and environed by
[Pg 209]

dullness, Emma is not dull. On the
contrary, she is remarkably engaging;
less vivacious than Elizabeth Bennet,
but infinitely more agreeable. She puts
us into a good humour with ourselves,
she “produces delight.” The secret of
her potency is that she has grasped the
essential things of life, and let the non-essentials
go. There is distinction in
the way she accepts near duties, in her
sense of balance, and order, and propriety.
She is a normal creature, highly
civilized, and sanely artificial. Mr.
Saintsbury says that Miss Austen knew
two things: humanity and art. “Her
men, though limited, are true, and her
women are, in the old sense, absolute.”
Emma is “absolute.” The possibility—or
impossibility—of being
Mr. Knightley’s intellectual competitor
never occurs to her. She covets no
empty honours. She is content to be
necessary and unassailable.

Mr. Chesterton has written a whimsical
[Pg 210]

and fault-finding paper entitled
“The Evolution of Emma,” in which
he assumes that this embodiment of domesticity
is the prototype of the modern
welfare worker who runs birth-control
meetings and baby weeks, urges
maternity bills upon legislators, prates
about segregation, and preaches eugenics
and sex hygiene to a world that
knows a great deal more about such
matters than she does. Emma, says
Mr. Chesterton, considers that because
she is more genteel than Harriet
Smith she is privileged to alienate this
humble friend from Robert Martin
who wants to marry her, and fling her
at the head of Mr. Elton who doesn’t.
Precisely the same spirit—so he asserts—induces
the welfare worker to
conceive that her greater gentility (she
sometimes calls it intelligence) warrants
her gross intrusion into the lives
of people who are her social inferiors.
It is because they
are
her social inferiors
[Pg 211]

that she dares to do it. The
goodness of her intentions carries no
weight. Emma’s intentions are of the
best, so far as she can separate them
from her subconscious love of meddling.

This ingenious comparison is very
painful to Emma’s friends in the world
of English readers. It cannot be that
she is the ancestress of a type so vitally
opposed to all that she holds correct
and becoming. I do not share Mr.
Chesterton’s violent hostility to reformers,
even when they have no standard
of taste. There are questions too
big and pertinacious for taste to control.
I only think it hard that, feeling
as he does, he should compare Emma’s
youthful indiscretions with more radical
and disquieting activities. Emma is
indiscreet, but she is only twenty-one.
At twenty-two she is safely married to
Mr. Knightley, and her period of indiscretion
is over. At twenty-two she
[Pg 212]

has fulfilled her destiny, has stepped
into line, and, as the centre of the social
unit, is harmoniously adjusted, not to
Highbury alone, but to civilization and
the long traditions of the ages. That
she should regard her lover, even in her
first glowing moments of happiness, as
an agreeable companion, and as an
assistant in the care of her father, is
characteristic. “Self-respect, humour
and hardness of heart” are out of hand
with romance. So much the better for
Mr. Knightley, who will never find
his emotions drained, his wisdom questioned,
his authority denied, and who
will come in time to believe that he, and
not his wife, is “absolute.”

“The formal stars do travel so,

That we their names and courses know;

And he that on their changes looks

Would think them govern’d by our books.”

Miss Austen’s views on marriage are
familiar to her readers, and need no
comment. They must have been drawn
[Pg 213]

from a careful survey of the society
which surrounded her, a society composed
for the most part of insensitive,
unrebellious men and women who had
the habit of making the best of things.
At times the cynicism is a trifle too
pronounced, as when Eleanor Dashwood
asks herself why Mr. Palmer is
so ill-mannered:

“His temper might perhaps be a
little soured by finding, like many
others of his sex, that through some unaccountable
bias in favour of beauty,
he was the husband of a very silly
woman. But she knew that this kind of
blunder was too common for any sensible
man to be lastingly hurt by it.”

At times simplicity and sincerity
transcend the limits of likelihood, as
when Elizabeth Watson says to her
young sister:

“I should not like marrying a disagreeable
man any more than yourself;
but I do not think there are many very
[Pg 214]

disagreeable men. I think I could like
any good-humoured man with a comfortable
income.”

At times a delicacy of touch lends
distinction to the frankest worldliness,
as when Mary Crawford generously applauds
her brother Henry’s determination
to marry Fanny Price:

“I know that a wife you loved would
be the happiest of women; and that
even when you ceased to love, she would
yet find in you the liberality and good
breeding of a gentleman.”

There is a lamentable lack of sentiment
in even this last and happiest
exposition of married life; but it expresses
the whole duty of husbands,
and the whole welfare of wives, as understood
in the year 1814.

If Jane Austen and Thackeray
wrought their heroines with perfect
and painstaking accuracy, Scott’s attitude
was for the most part one of
reprehensible indifference. His world
[Pg 215]

was run by men, and the ringleted
sylphs of seventeen (the word “flapper”
had not then cast discredit on this
popular age) play very simple parts.
Ruskin, it may be remembered, ardently
admired these young ladies, and
held them up as models of “grace,
tenderness and intellectual power” to
all his female readers. It never occurred
to the great moralist, any more
than to the great story-teller, that a
girl is something more than a set of
assorted virtues. “To Scott, as to most
men of his age,” observes an acute
English critic, “woman was not an individual,
but an institution—a toast
that was drunk some time after Church
and King.”

Diana Vernon exists to be toasted.
She has the

“True blue

And Mrs. Crewe”

quality associated in our minds with
clinking glasses, and loud-spoken loyalty
[Pg 216]

to Stuart or to Hanoverian. She
has always caught the fancy of men,
and has been likened in her day to
Shakespeare’s Beatrice, Rosalind and
Portia, ladies of wit and distinction, who
aspire to play adventurous rôles in the
mad medley of life. She is as well
fitted to provoke general admiration as
Julia Mannering is to awaken personal
regard. She is one of the five heroines
of English fiction with whom Mr.
Saintsbury avows no man of taste and
spirit can fail to fall in love. He does
not aspire, even in fancy, to marry her.
His choice of a wife is Elizabeth Bennet.
But for “occasional companionship”
he gives Diana the prize.

Occasional companionship is all that
we get of her in “Rob Roy.” She enlivens
the opening chapters very prettily,
but is eliminated from the best
and most vigorous episodes. My own
impression is that Scott forgot all about
Miss Vernon while he was happily engaged
[Pg 217]

with MacGregor, and the Bailie,
and Andrew Fairservice; and that
whenever he remembered her, he produced
her on the stage as mysteriously
and as irrelevantly as a conjurer lifts
white rabbits out of his hat. Wrapped
in a horseman’s cloak, she comes riding
under a frosty moon, gives Frank
Osbaldistone a packet of valuable
papers, bids him one of half-a-dozen
solemn and final farewells, and disappears
until the next trick is called. It
was a good arrangement for Scott, who
liked to have the decks cleared for action;
but it makes Diana unduly fantastic
and unreal.

So, too, does the weight of learning
with which Rashleigh Osbaldistone has
loaded her. Greek and Latin, history,
science and philosophy, “as well as
most of the languages of modern Europe,”
seem a large order for a girl of
eighteen. Diana can also saddle and
bridle a horse, clear a five-barred gate,
[Pg 218]

and fire a gun without winking. Yet
she has a “tiny foot”—so at least Scott
says—and she rides to hounds with
her hair bound only by the traditional
ribbon, so that her long tresses “stream
on the breeze.” The absurd and complicated
plot in which she is involved
is never disentangled. Dedicated in
infancy to the cloister, which was at
least unusual, she has been released
by Rome from vows she has never
taken, only on condition that she marries
a cousin who is within the forbidden
degree of kindred. Her numerous
allusions to this circumstance—“The
fatal veil was wrapped round me in my
cradle,” “I am by solemn contract the
bride of Heaven, betrothed to the convent
from the cradle”—distress and
mystify poor Frank, who is not clever
at best, and who accepts all her verdicts
as irrevocable. Every time she
bids him farewell, he believes it to be
the end; and he loses the last flicker of
[Pg 219]

hope when she sends him a ring by—of
all people under Heaven—Helen
MacGregor, who delivers it with these
cheerful words: “Young man, this
comes from one whom you will never
see more. If it is a joyless token, it is
well fitted to pass through the hands of
one to whom joy can never be known.
Her last words were ‘Let him forget me
forever.’”

After which the astute reader is prepared
to hear that Frank and Diana
were soon happily married, without any
consideration for cradle or for cloister,
and without the smallest intervention
from Rome.

Miss Vernon is one of Scott’s characters
for whom an original has been
found. This in itself is a proof of
vitality. Nobody would dream of
finding the original of Lucy Bertram,
or Isabella Wardour, or Edith Bellenden.
As a matter of fact, the same prototype
would do for all three, and half-a-dozen
[Pg 220]

more. But Captain Basil Hall
expended much time and ingenuity in
showing that Scott drew Diana after
the likeness of Miss Jane Anne Cranstoun,
a young lady of Edinburgh who
married an Austrian nobleman, and
left Scotland before the first of the
Waverley Novels was written.

Miss Cranstoun was older than Scott,
well born, well looking, a fearless horse-woman,
a frank talker, a warm friend,
and had some reputation as a wit. It
was through her that the young man
made his first acquaintance with Bürger’s
ballad, “Lenore,” which so powerfully
affected his imagination that he sat
up all night, translating it into English
verse. When it was finished, he repaired
to Miss Cranstoun’s house to show her
the fruits of his labour. It was then
half-past six, an hour which to that
vigorous generation seemed seasonable
for a morning call. Clarissa Harlowe
grants Lovelace his interviews at five.

[Pg 221]

Miss Cranstoun listened to the ballad
with more attention than Diana vouchsafed
to her lover’s translation from
Ariosto (it was certainly better worth
hearing), gave Scott his meed of praise
and encouragement, and remained his
friend, confidant and critic until her
marriage separated them forever. There
are certain points of resemblance between
this clever woman and the high-spirited
girl whom Justice Inglewood
calls the “heath-bell of Cheviot,” and
MacGregor “a daft hempsie but a mettle
quean.” It may be that Diana owes
her vitality to Scott’s faithful remembrance
of Miss Cranstoun, just as Jeanie
Deans owes her rare and perfect naturalness
to his clear conception of her noble
prototype, Helen Walker. “A novel is
history without documents, nothing to
prove it,” said Mr. John Richard Green;
but unproved verities, as unassailable
as unheard melodies, have a knack of
surviving the rack and ruin of time.

[Pg 222]

When Thackeray courageously gave
to the world “a novel without a hero,”
he atoned for his oversight by enriching
it with two heroines, so carefully portrayed,
so admirably contrasted, that
each strengthens and perfects the other.
Just as Elizabeth Tudor and Mary
Stuart are etched together on the pages
of history with a vivid intensity which
singly they might have missed, so
Amelia Sedley and Becky Sharp (
place
à la vertu
) are etched together on the
pages of fiction with a distinctness derived
in part from the force of comparison.
And just as readers of history
have been divided for more than three
hundred years into adherents of the
rival queens, so readers of novels have
been divided for more than seventy
years into admirers of the rival heroines.
“I have been Emmy’s faithful
knight since I was ten years old, and
read ‘Vanity Fair’ somewhat stealthily,”
confessed Andrew Lang; and by
[Pg 223]

way of proving his allegiance, he laid
at his lady’s feet the stupidest repudiation
of Rebecca ever voiced by a man
of letters. To class her with Barnes
Newcome and Mrs. Macknezie is an
unpardonable affront. A man may be a
perfect Sir Galahad without surrendering
all sense of values and proportion.

When “Vanity Fair” was published,
the popular verdict was against
Becky. She so disedified the devout
that reviewers, with the awful image of
the British Matron before their eyes,
dealt with her in a spirit of serious condemnation.
It will be remembered that
Taine, caring much for art and little
for matrons, protested keenly against
Thackeray’s treatment of his own heroine,
against the snubs and sneers and
censures with which the English novelist
thought fit to convince his English
readers that he did not sympathize
with misconduct. These readers hastened
in turn to explain that Becky
[Pg 224]

was rightfully “odious” in her author’s
eyes, and that she was “created to be
exposed,” which sounds a little like the
stern creed which held that men were
created to be damned. Trollope, oppressed
by her dissimilarity to Grace
Crawley and to Lily Dale, openly
mourned her shortcomings; and a
writer in “Frazier’s Magazine” assured
the rank and file of the respectable that
in real life they would shrink from her
as from an infection. One voice only,
that of an unknown critic in a little-read
review, was raised in her defence.
This brave man admitted without
flinching her many sins, but added
that he loved her.

The more lenient standards of our
day have lifted Rebecca’s reputation
into the realm of disputable things.
So distinguished a moralist as Mr.
William Dean Howells praised her
tepidly; being disposed in her favour
by a distaste, not for Amelia, but for
[Pg 225]

Beatrix Esmond, whom he pronounced
a “doll” and an “eighteenth-century
marionette,” and compared with whom
he found Becky refreshingly real. As
for Thackeray’s harshness, Mr. Howells
condoned it on the score of incomprehension.
“His morality is the old conventional
morality which we are now a
little ashamed of; but in his time and
place he could scarcely have had any
other. After all, he was a simple soul,
and strictly of his period.”

This is an interesting point of view.
To most of us “Vanity Fair” seems
about as simple as “Ecclesiastes,” the
author of which was also “strictly of
his period.” Sir Sidney Low, the most
trenchant critic whom the fates have
raised to champion the incomparable
Becky, is by way of thinking that in so
far as Thackeray was a moralist, he was
unfair to her; but that in so far as he
was a much greater artist than a
moralist, she emerges triumphant from
[Pg 226]

his hands. “She is the first embodiment
in English fiction of the woman whose
emotions are dominated by her intellect.
She is a fighter against fate, and
she wages war with unfailing energy,
passing lightly, as great warriors do,
over the bodies of the killed and
wounded.”

She does more. She snatches a partial
victory out of the jaws of a crushing
defeat. The stanchest fighter expects
some backing from fate, some
good cards to lay on the table. But
Becky’s fortunes are in Thackeray’s
hands, and he rules against her at every
turn. Life and death are her inexorable
opponents. Miss Crawley recovers
(which she has no business to do) from
a surfeit of lobster, when by dying she
would have enriched Rawdon, already
in love with Rebecca. Lady Crawley
lives just long enough to spoil Becky’s
chance of marrying Sir Pitt. It is all
very hard and very wrong. The little
[Pg 227]

governess had richly earned Miss
Crawley’s money by her patient care
of that ungrateful invalid. She would
have been kind and good-tempered to
Sir Pitt, whereas his virtuous son and
daughter-in-law (the lady Jane whom
Thackeray never ceases to praise) leave
the poor old paralytic to the care of
a coarse, untrained and cruel servant.
Becky is not the only sufferer by the
bad luck which makes her from start to
finish, “a fighter against fate.”

Sir Sidney is by no means content
with the somewhat murky twilight in
which we take leave of this great little
adventuress, with the atmosphere of
charity lists, bazaars and works of piety
which depressingly surrounds her. He
is sure she made a most charming and
witty old lady, and that she eventually
won over Colonel Dobbin (in spite
of Amelia’s misgivings) by judicious
praise of the “History of the Punjaub.”
And I am equally sure that she never
[Pg 228]

suffered herself to lose so valuable an
asset as young Rawdon. Becky’s indifference
to her son is the strongest
card that Thackeray plays. By throwing
into high relief the father’s proud
affection for the boy (who is an uncommonly
nice little lad), he deepens
and darkens the mother’s unconcern.
Becky is impervious to the charm of
childhood, and she is not affectionate.
Once in a while she is moved by a generous
impulse; but the crowded cares
and sordid scheming of her life leave no
room for sensibility.

Nevertheless, if the Reverend Bute
Crawley and his household look upon
little Rawdon with deep respect as the
possible heir of Queen’s Crawley, “between
whom and the title there was
only the sickly pale child, Pitt Binkie,”
it is unlikely that Rebecca the farseeing
would ignore the potential greatness
of her son. She cannot afford to
lose any chance, or any combination of
[Pg 229]

chances, in the hazardous game she
plays. There is nothing like the spectacle
of this game in English letters. To
watch Becky manipulate her brother-in-law,
Sir Pitt, is a never-ending delight.
He is dull, pompous, vain, ungenerous.
He has inherited the fortune
which should have been her husband’s.
Yet there is no hatred in her heart, nor
any serious malice. Hatred, like love,
is an emotional extravagance, and
Becky’s accounts are very strictly kept.

Therefore, when she persuades the
Baronet to spend a week in the little
house on Curzon Street, even Thackeray
admits that she is sincerely happy
to have him there. She comes bustling
and blushing into his room with a
scuttle of coals; she cooks excellent
dishes for his dinner; she gives him
Lord Steyne’s White Hermitage to
warm his frozen blood, telling him it is
a cheap wine which Rawdon has picked
up in France; she sits by his side in the
[Pg 230]

firelight, stitching a shirt for her little
son; she plays every detail of her part
with the careful and conscientious art
of a Dutch painter composing a domestic
scene; and she asks no unreasonable
return for her labours. Rawdon, who
does nothing, is disgusted because his
brother gives them no money; but Rebecca,
who does everything, is content
with credit. Sir Pitt, as the head of the
family, is the corner-stone upon which
she rears the fabric of her social life.

The exact degree of Becky’s innocence
and guilt is a matter of slight importance.
There is no goodness in her
to be spoiled or saved. To try to soften
our judgment by pleading one or two
acts of contemptuous kindness is absurd.
Her qualities are great qualities:
valour, and wit, and audacity, and
patience, and an ungrumbling acceptance
of fate. No one recognizes these
qualities except Lord Steyne, who has a
greatness of his own. It will be remembered
[Pg 231]

that on one occasion he gives
Rebecca eleven hundred pounds to discharge
her indebtedness to Miss Briggs;
and subsequently discovers that the
amount due the “sheep-dog” is six
hundred pounds, and that Rebecca has
been far too thrifty to pay any of it out
of the sum bestowed on her for that
purpose. He is not angry at being outwitted,
as a small and stupid man
would have been. He is charmed.

“His lordship’s admiration for Becky
rose immeasurably at this proof of her
cleverness. Getting the money was
nothing—but getting double the sum
she wanted, and paying nobody—it
was a magnificent stroke. ‘What
an accomplished little devil it is!’ he
thought. ‘She beats all the women I
have ever seen in the course of my well-spent
life. They are babies compared
to her. I am a green-horn myself, and a
fool in her hands—an old fool. She is
unsurpassable in lies.’”

[Pg 232]

With which testimony, candid, fervent,
and generous withal, Becky’s case
can be considered closed. Discredited,
humiliated, and punished in the irrepressible
interests of morality, she is
left stranded amid life’s minor respectabilities
which must have irked her
sorely; but which Thackeray plainly
considered to be far beyond her merits.
I hope it comforts her in that shadowy
land where dwell the immortals of fiction
to know that her shameless little
figure, flitting dauntlessly from venture
to venture, from hazard to hazard, has
never been without appreciative observers.
I had almost said appreciative
and pitying observers; but Becky’s is
the last ghost in Christendom whom I
should dare to affront with pity.

[Pg 233]

The Preacher at Large

The spirit of Hannah More is
abroad in the land. It does not
preach the same code of morals that
the good Hannah preached in her lifetime,
but it preaches its altered code
with her assurance and with her continuity.
Miss More preached to the
poor the duty of an unreasonable and
unmanly content, and to the rich the
duty of personal and national smugness.
Her successors are more than likely to
urge upon rich and poor the paramount
duty of revolt. The essence of preaching,
however, is not doctrine, but didacticism.
Beliefs and behaviour are
subject to geographical and chronological
conditions, but human nature
lives and triumphs in the sermon.

Hannah More was not licensed to
preach. She would have paled at the
thought of a lady taking orders, or
[Pg 234]

climbing the pulpit steps. She had no
intellectual gifts. Her most intimate
critic, the Honourable Augustine Birrell
(the only living man who confesses
to the purchase of her works in nineteen
calf-bound volumes, which he
subsequently buried in his garden),
pronounced her to be “an encyclopædia
of all literary vices.” Yet for
forty years she told her countrymen
what they should do, and what they
should leave undone, in return for
which censorship they paid her boundless
deference and thirty thousand
pounds, a great deal of money in those
days.

Miss More is a connecting link between
the eighteenth century, which
moralized, and the nineteenth century,
which preached. Both were didactic,
but, as Mr. Austin Dobson observes,
“didactic with a difference.” Addison
was characterized in his day as “a
parson in a tie-wig,” an unfriendly,
[Pg 235]

but not altogether inaccurate, description,
the tie-wig symbolizing a certain
gentlemanly aloofness from potent and
primitive emotions. Religion is a primitive
emotion, and the eighteenth century
(
ce siècle sans âme
) was, in polite
life, singularly shy of religion; reserving
it for the pulpit, and handling it there
with the caution due to an explosive.
Crabbe, who also lapped over into the
nineteenth century, was reproached by
his friends for talking about Heaven
and Hell in his sermons, “as though he
had been a Methodist.”

From such indiscretions the tie-wig
preserved the eighteenth-century moralists.
Addison meditates for a morning
in Westminster Abbey, and the outcome
of his meditation is that the
poets have no monuments, and the
monuments no poets. Steele walks the
London streets, jostling against vice
and misery, and pauses to tell us that a
sturdy beggar extracted from him the
[Pg 236]

price of a drink by pleading mournfully
that all his family had died of thirst;
a jest which took easily with the crowd,
and might be trusted to raise a sympathetic
laugh to-day. It is plain that
these gentlemen felt without saying
what Henry Adams said without feeling,
that “morality is a private and
costly luxury,” and so forbore to urge it
upon a bankrupt world.

The paradox of our own time is
that clergymen, whose business it is
to preach, are listened to impatiently,
while laymen, whose business it is to
instruct or to amuse, are encouraged
to preach. I open two magazines, and
am confronted by prophetic papers on
“The Vanishing Sermon,” and “Will
Preaching Become Obsolete?” I exchange
them for two others, and find
lengthy articles entitled “Can We Control
Our Own Morals?” and “Spiritual
Possibilities of Business Life.” Now,
if a disquisition on “Spiritual Possibilities
[Pg 237]

of Business Life” be not a sermon,
of what elements is a sermon
composed? Yet when I endeavour to
ascertain these possibilities, I read that
business men often refuse to listen to
professional preaching, because, while
their democratic ideals, their enthusiasm
for human values, and their passion
for scientific perfection in their
products “leave them not far from the
Kingdom of Heaven,” the Church, unhappily
for itself, “has not been big
enough or strong enough to captivate
their imagination, and hold their allegiance.”

This would seem to imply that business
men are too good to go to church—a
novel and, I should think, popular
point of view. Congregations hear
little like it from the pulpit, the average
clergyman being unable to observe
any signs of a commercial Utopia, and
having a tiresome and Jeremiah-like
habit of pointing out defects. As for
[Pg 238]

asking a group of magazine-readers if
they can control their own morals, the
query is a vaporous one, not meant to
be answered scientifically, but after a
formula settled and approved. Even
the concession to modernism implied
in its denial of religion as a compelling
force gets us no nearer to our goal.
“The faith we need is not necessarily
faith in any supernatural help; but only
in the demonstrated fact of the possibility
of controlling our own minds and
morals by going at it in the right way.”
The tendency of a simple truth, that
abstraction which we all admire, to develop
into a truism, is no less noticeable
when set forth in the persuasiveness
of print than when delivered with
ecclesiastical authority.

Personally, I cannot conceive of a
sermonless world. The preacher’s function
is too manifest to be ignored,
his message too direct to be diverted.
Joubert said truly that devout men
[Pg 239]

and women listen with pleasure to dull
sermons, because they recognize the legitimate
relation between priest and
people, and their minds are attuned to
receptivity. And if a dull sermon can
command the attention and awaken
the sympathy of a congregation honest
enough to admit that dullness is
the paramount note of human intercourse,
and that it is as well developed
in the listeners as in the speaker, think
of the power which individual intelligence
derives from collective authority.
This is the combination which so fascinated
Henry Adams when he speculated
upon the ecclesiasticism of the
thirteenth century; its nobility, lucidity
and weight. “The great theologians
were also architects who undertook
to build a Church Intellectual, corresponding,
bit by bit, to the Church Administrative,
both expressing—and expressed
by—the Church Architectural.”

With the coming of the printed
[Pg 240]

word, the supreme glory of the spoken
word departed. Reading is the accepted
substitute for oratory as for
conversation, a substitute so cheap, so
accessible, so accommodating, that its
day will wane only with the waning
warmth of the sun, or the exhaustion
and collapse of civilization. Yet even
under the new dispensation, even with
the amazing multiplicity of creeds
(twenty-four religions to one sauce,
lamented Talleyrand a hundred years
ago), even though ecclesiastical architecture
has ceased to express anything
but a love of comfort and an understanding
of acoustics, the preacher
holds his own. There are always people
interested in the relation of their
souls to God; and when it happens
that a man is born into the world capable
of convincing them that the only
thing of importance in life is the relation
of their souls to God, he becomes
a maker of history.

[Pg 241]

John Wesley was such a man. I
read recently that, when he was preaching
at Tullamore, a large cat leaped
from the rafters upon a woman’s head,
and ran over the heads and shoulders
of the closely packed congregation.
“But none of them cried out any
more than if it had been a butterfly.”

There
was a test of the preacher’s supremacy.
What other influence could
have been so absolute and coercive?
When I was a very little girl I
was taken to see Edwin Booth play
“Hamlet,” in the old Walnut Street
theatre of Philadelphia. That night a
cat entered with the ghost, and paced
sedately in his wake across the ramparts
of Elsinore. The audience
shouted its amusement, and the poignancy
of a great scene, interpreted by
a great actor, was temporarily lost.
“Spellbound” is a word in common use,
expressing, as a rule, very ordinary
attention. Booth cast a spell, but it
[Pg 242]

was easily broken. Wesley cast a spell
which defied both fear and laughter.
Nothing short of dynamite could have
distracted that Tullamore congregation
from the business it had on hand.

That the sermon was tyrannical in
the days of its pride and power is a
truth which cannot be gainsaid. Eloquence
in the pulpit has no more bowels
for its victims than has eloquence on the
rostrum. History is full of instances
that move our souls to wonder. When
Darnley, new wedded to Mary Stuart,
and seeing himself in the rôle of peacemaker,
went to hear Knox preach in
Saint Giles’, that uncompromising divine
likened him to Ahab, who incurred
the wrath of Jehovah by acquiescing in
the idolatry of Jezebel, his wife. James
Melville says that when Knox preached,
“he was like to ding the pulpit to blads,
and fly out of it.” Darnley, furious,
or frightened, or both, left the church
while the victorious preacher was still
[Pg 243]

marshalling the hosts of Israel to combat.

Charles the Second was wont to recall
with bitter mirth a certain Sunday
in Edinburgh when he was forced by
his loyal Scotch subjects to hear six
sermons, a heavy price to pay even for
loyalty. Paris may have been worth
one mass to Henry of Navarre; but all
Scotland was not worth six sermons to
Charles Stuart, and the memory of that
Sunday sweetened his return to France
and to freedom.

It is a far cry from Knox hurling
the curses of his tribal God at alien
tribesmen, from Wesley convicting his
narrow world “of sin, and of justice,
and of judgment,” even from that
“good, honest and painful sermon”
which Dr. Pepys heard one Sunday
morning with inward misgivings and
troubled stirrings of the soul, to the sterilized
discourse which offends against
no assortment of beliefs, and no standards
[Pg 244]

of taste. Frederick Locker gives
us in his “Confidences” a grim description
of the funeral services of
George Henry Lewes, at Highgate
Cemetery. Twelve gentlemen of rationalistic
views had gathered in the
mortuary chapel, and to them a thirteenth
gentleman, also of rationalistic
views, but who had taken orders somewhere,
delivered an address, “half
apologizing for suggesting the possible
immortality of some of our souls.”

This may indicate the progress of
the ages; but does it also indicate the
progress of the ages that the moral
essay, which was wont to be satiric, is
now degenerating into the printed sermon,
which is sure to be censorious;
that the very men who once charmed
us with the lightness of their touch and
the keen edge of their humour are now
preaching thunderously? For years
Mr. Chesterton gave us reason to be
grateful that we had learned to read.
[Pg 245]

Who so debonair when he was gay,
who so incisive when he was serious,
who so ready with his thrust, who so
understanding in his sympathy? We
trusted him never to preach and never
to scold, and he has betrayed our trust
by doing both. He calls it prophesying;
but prophesying is preaching, plus
scolding, and no one knows this better
than he does.

The earth is a bad little planet, and
we hope that other planets are happier
and better behaved. But the vials of
Mr. Chesterton’s wrath are emptied
on the heads of people who do not read
him, and who have no idea that they
are being anathematized. Swift used
to say that most sermons were aimed
at men and women who never went
to church, and the same sort of thing
happens to-day. We, Mr. Chesterton’s
chosen readers, are not capitalists,
or philanthropists, or prohibitionists, or
any of the things he abhors; and we
[Pg 246]

wish he would leave these gentry alone,
and write for us again with the old
shining wit, the old laughter, the old
mockery, which was like a dash of salt
on the flavourless porridge of life.

Twenty-one years ago Mr. G. Lowes
Dickinson published an American edition
of the “Letters from a Chinese
Official,” a species of sermon, it is true,
but preached delicately and understandingly,
in suave and gleaming sentences,
its burden of thought half
veiled by the graceful lightness of its
speech. American readers took that
book to heart. We could not make
over the United States into a second
China. “Some god this severance
rules.” But we accepted in the spirit
of reason a series of criticisms which
were reasonably conveyed to our intelligence,
and a great deal of good they
did us.

Much has happened in twenty-one
years, and few of us are so light-hearted
[Pg 247]

or so reasonable as of yore.
Is it because we have grown impatient
of strictures that Mr. Dickinson’s sermons
now seem to us a trifle heavy,
his reproaches more than a trifle harsh?
We did not mind being compared adversely
to China, but we do mind
being blamed for Germany’s transgressions.
When, as the mouthpiece
of suffering Europe, Mr. Dickinson
says, “America is largely responsible
for our condition,” a flat denial seems
in order. America did not invade
Belgium, she did not burn French
towns, she did not sink merchant ships.
It seems to be Mr. Dickinson’s impression
that our entrance, not without
provocation, into the war “prolonged”
the struggle, to the grievous injury of
the Allies as well as of the Central
Powers. There is a veracious paragraph
in one of Mr. Tarkington’s
“Penrod” stories, which describes the
bewilderment of an ordinary American
[Pg 248]

boy who does something he cannot
well help doing, and who is thrashed
or rewarded by an irate or delighted
father, according to a point of view
which is a veiled mystery to him. So,
too, the ordinary American adult gapes
confusedly when a British pacifist tells
him that, by fighting the war to a finish,
he and his nation are to blame for the
economic ruin of Europe.

There is the same misunderstanding
between unprofessional as between sectarian
preachers, and the same air of
thoughtful originality when they deal
with the obvious and ascertained.
When I see a serious essayist hailed as
“the first wholly realistic and deductive
moralist” that the country, or
the century, has produced, I naturally
examine his deductions with interest.
What I find is a severe, but well-merited,
denunciation of the civilized world
as hypocritical, because its practice
is not in accord with its profession.
[Pg 249]

Readers of the New Testament will
recall the same divergence between the
practice and the profession of the Jews
two thousand years ago. It has been
neither unknown nor unobserved in
any age, in any land, amid any people
since.

There were a great many clergymen
preaching in Hannah More’s day, and
there are a great many clergymen
preaching now. Churches and temples
and halls of every conceivable denomination,
and of no conceivable denomination,
are open to us. There is
something fair and square in going
to a place of which sermons are the
natural product, and hearing one.
There is also something fair and square
in taking a volume of sermons down
from the shelf, and reading one. I am
not of those who believe that a sermon,
like a speech, needs to be spoken. A
great deal of quiet thinking goes with
the printed page, and the reader has
[Pg 250]

one obvious advantage over the listener.
He can close the book at any
moment without disedifying a congregation.
But just as Hannah More
intruded her admonitions into the free
spaces of life, so her successors betray
us into being sermonized when we are
pursuing our week-day avocations in
a week-day mood, which is neither
fair nor square. It is the attitude of
the nursery governess (Hannah was the
greatest living exemplar of the nursery
governess), and there is no escape
from its unauthorized supervision.

When a hitherto friendly magazine
prints nine pages of sermon under a
disingenuous title suggestive of domestic
economy, and beginning brightly,
“What right has any one to preach?”
we feel a sense of betrayal. Any one
has a right to preach (the laxity of
church discipline is to blame); but a
sense of honour, or a sense of humour,
or a sense of humanity should debar
[Pg 251]

an author from pretending he is not
preaching when he writes like this:
“If we have a desire that seems to us
contrary to our duty, it means that
there is a conflict within us; it means
either that our sense of duty is not a
sense of the whole self, or that our
desire is not of the whole self. This
then is to be aimed at—the identity
of duty and desire.” And so on, and
so on, through nine virtuous pages.
The reluctance on the part of magazine
preachers to refer openly to God tends
to prolixity. Thomas à Kempis, reflecting
on the same situation, which
is not new, briefly recommends us to
submit our wills to the will of God.
Monk though he was, he understood
that duty and desire are on opposite
sides of the camp, and refuse to be
harmoniously blended. This is why
living Christians are called, and will
be called to the end of time, the church
militant.

[Pg 252]

A sanguine preacher in “The Popular
Science Monthly” holds out a
hope that duty and desire may be
ultimately blended through an adroit
application of eugenics. What we
need, and have not got, is a race which
“instinctively and spontaneously”
does right. Therefore it behooves us
to superinduce, through grafting and
transplanting, “the preservation and
perpetuation of a human stock that
may be depended upon to lead moral
lives without the necessity of much
social compulsion.” It sounds interesting;
and though Mr. Chesterton loudly
asserts that eugenics degrade the race,
we are too well accustomed to these
divergencies on the part of our preachers
to take them deeply to heart.

Mr. Chesterton has also used strong
language (understatement is not his
long suit) in denouncing “the diabolical
idiocy that can regard beer or tobacco
as in some sort evil or unseemly”;
[Pg 253]

and I am disposed, in a mild way, to
agree with him. Yet when some time
ago I read a pleasantly worded little
sermon on “An Artist’s Morality,”
being curious to know how a moral
artist differed from a moral chemist,
or a moral accountant, the only concrete
instance of morality adduced
was the abandonment of tobacco. As
soon as the artist resolved to amend
his blameless life, he made the discovery
that its chief element of discord
was his pipe. “As a thing of sudden
nastiness, I threw it out of the window,
drawing in, almost reverently, a deep
breath of cool October air.”

It is possible that the American public
likes being preached to, just as
Hannah More’s British public liked
being preached to. This would account
for the little sermons thrown
on the screen between moving pictures,
brief admonishments pointing
out the obvious moral of the drama,
[Pg 254]

deploring the irregularity of masculine
affections, the soulless selfishness of
wealth; and asserting with colossal impudence
that the impelling purpose of
the entertainment is to bring home to
the hearts of men an understanding of
the misery they cause. As it is the
rule of moving-picture plays to change
their scenes with disconcerting speed,
but to leave all explanatory texts on
the screen long enough to be learned
by heart, these moral precepts dominate
the show. The franker its revelations,
the more precepts are needed
to offset them. Rows of decent and
respectable men, who accompany their
decent and respectable wives, are flattered
by being accused of sins which
they have never aspired to commit.

“I must acknowledge that some
writers upon ethical questions have
been men of fair moral character,”
said Sir Leslie Stephen in a moment
of expansion which was no less wise
[Pg 255]

than generous, seeing that he was
himself the author of two volumes
of lay sermons, originally delivered
before ethical societies. Didacticism
can go no further than in these monitory
papers. There is one on “The
Duties of Authors,” which is calculated
to drive a light-minded or light-hearted
neophyte from a profession
where he is expected in his most unguarded
moments to influence morally
his equally unguarded readers. But
Sir Leslie played the game according
to rule. A plainly worded notice on
the fly-leaf warned the public that the
sermons were sermons, not critical
studies, or Alpine adventures. If they
seem to us overcrowded with counsel,
this is only because they are non-religious
in their character. When religion
is excluded from a sermon, there is too
much room left for morality. Without
the vast compelling presence of God,
the activities of men grow feverish,
[Pg 256]

and lose the “imperious sweetness”
of sanctity.

If our preachers are trying to recivilize
humanity, it behooves us, perhaps,
to be more patient with their methods.
All civilizing formulas are uneasy possessions.
Ruskin evolved one, and no
man could have been more sincere or
more insistent in applying it. So painfully
did he desire that his readers
should think as he did, that he grew to
look upon the world with a jaundiced
eye because it was necessarily full of
people who thought differently. Even
Hannah More had a little formula for
the correction of England; but it gave
her no uneasiness, because she could
not conceive of herself as a failure. Advice
flowed from her as it flows from
her followers to-day. There was but
one of her, which was too much.
There are many of them, and great
is their superfluity. The “Vanishing
Sermon” has not vanished. It has
[Pg 257]

only changed its habitat. It has forsaken
the pulpit, and taken up quarters
in what was formerly the strong-hold
of literature.

[Pg 258]

The Battle-Field of Education

Readers of Jane Austen will remember
how Mr. Darcy and Miss
Bingley defined to their own satisfaction
the requirements of an accomplished
woman. Such a one, said Miss
Bingley, must add to ease of manner
and address “a thorough knowledge of
music, singing, drawing, dancing, and
the modern languages.” To which Mr.
Darcy subjoined: “All this she must
possess, and she must have something
more substantial in the improvement of
her mind by extensive reading.” Whereupon
Elizabeth Bennet stoutly affirmed
that she had never met a woman in
whom “capacity, taste, application and
elegance” were so admirably and so
formidably united.

Between an accomplished woman in
Miss Austen’s day and an educated
[Pg 259]

man in ours, there are many steps to
climb; but the impression conveyed by
those who now seek to define the essentials
of education is that, like Miss
Bingley and Mr. Darcy, they ask too
much. Also that they are unduly influenced
by the nature of the things
they themselves chance to know.
Hence the delight of agitators in drawing
up lists of ascertainable facts, and
severely catechizing the public. They
forget, or perhaps they never read, the
serene words of Addison (an educated
man) concerning the thousand and one
matters with which he would not burden
his mind “for a Vatican.”

With every century that rolls over
the world there is an incalculable increase
of knowledge. It ranges backward
and forward, from the latest
deciphering of an Assyrian tablet to
the latest settling of a Balkan boundary-line;
from a disconcerting fossil dug
out of its prehistoric mud to a new
[Pg 260]

explosive warranted to destroy a continent.
Obviously an educated man,
even a very highly educated man, must
be content, in the main, with a “modest
and wise ignorance.” Intelligence,
energy, leisure, opportunity—these
things are doled out to him in niggardly
fashion; and with his beggar’s equipment
he confronts the vastness of time
and space, the years the world has
run, the forces which have sped her on
her way, and the hoarded thinking of
humanity.

Compared with this huge area of
“general information,” how firm and
final were the educational limits of a
young Athenian in the time of Plato!
The things he did not have to know fill
our encyclopædias. Copra and celluloid
were as remote from his field of
vision as were the Reformation and the
battle of Gettysburg. But ivory he had,
and the memory of Marathon, and the
noble pages of Thucydides. That there
[Pg 261]

were Barbarians in the world, he knew
as well as we do. Some, like the
Ethiops, dwelt so far away that Homer
called them “blameless.” Some were
so perilously near that the arts of war
grew with the arts of peace. For books
he had a certain delicate scorn, caught
from his master, Plato, who never forgave
their lack of reticence, their
fashion of telling everything to every
reader. But the suave and incisive
conversation of other Athenians taught
him intellectual lucidity, and the supreme
beauty of the spoken word.
“Late and laboriously,” says Josephus,
“did the Greeks acquire their knowledge
of Greek.” That they acquired it
to some purpose is evidenced by the
fact that the graduate of an American
college must have some knowledge of
Plato’s thinking, if he is to be called
educated. Where else shall he see the
human intellect, trained to strength
and symmetry like the body of an
[Pg 262]

athlete, exercising its utmost potency
and its utmost charm? Where else
shall he find a philosophy which has
“in all ages ravished the hearts of
men”?

A curious symptom of our own day is
that we have on one hand a strong and
deep dissatisfaction with the mental
equipment of young Americans, and on
the other an ever-increasing demand
for freedom, for self-development, for
doing away with serious and severe
study. The ideal school is one in which
the pupil is at liberty to get up and
leave the class if it becomes irksome,
and in which the teacher is expected to
comport himself like the kind-hearted
captain of the Mantelpiece. The ideal
college is one which prepares its students
for remunerative positions, which
teaches them how to answer the kind of
questions that captains of industry may
ask. One of the many critics of our
educational system has recently complained
[Pg 263]

that college professors are not
practical. “The undergraduate,” he
says, “sits during the four most impressionable
years of his life under the
tuition and influence of highly trained,
greatly devoted, and sincere men, who
are financial incompetents, who have
as little interest in, or understanding of,
business as has the boy himself.”

It does not seem to occur to this
gentleman that if college professors
knew anything about finance, they
would probably not remain college professors.
Learning and wealth have
never run in harness since Cadmus
taught Thebes the alphabet. It would
be a brave man who should say which
was the better gift; but one thing is
sure: unless we are prepared to grant
the full value of scholarship which adds
nothing to the wealth of nations, or to
the practical utilities of life, we shall
have only partial results from education.
And such scholarship can never
[Pg 264]

be generally approved. It is, and must
forever remain, says Augustine Birrell,
“in the best and noblest sense of a
good and noble word, essentially unpopular.”

The educational substitutes, now in
vogue, are many, and varied, and, of
their kind, good. They can show results,
and results that challenge competition.
Mr. Samuel Gompers, for
example, writes with pardonable complacency
of himself: “When I think of
the education I got in the London
streets, the training acquired by work
in the shop, the discipline growing out
of attempts to build an organization to
accomplish definite results, of the rich
cultural opportunities through human
contacts, I know that my educational
opportunities have been very unusual.”

This is, in a measure, true, and it is
not the first time that such opportunities
have been lauded to the skies.
“If a lad does not learn in the streets,”
[Pg 265]

said Robert Louis Stevenson, “it is because
he has no faculty of learning.”—“Books!
Don’t talk to me of books!”
said Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough.
“My books are cards and men.” It will
even be remembered that old Weller
boasted to Mr. Pickwick of the tuition
he had afforded Sam by turning him
at a tender age into the London gutters,
to learn what lessons they could teach.

Nevertheless, there is an education
that owes nothing to streets, or to work-shops,
or to games of chance. It was
not in the “full, vivid, instructive hours
of truancy” that Stevenson acquired
his knowledge of the English language,
which he wrote with unexampled vigour
and grace. It is not “human contact”
that can be always trusted to teach
men how to pronounce that language
correctly. This is an educational nicety
disregarded by a practical and busy
world. One of the best-informed women
I ever knew, who had been honoured
[Pg 266]

by several degrees, and who had turned
her knowledge to good account, could
never pronounce the test word, America.
One of the ablest and most influential
lawyers I ever knew, a college
man with an imposing library, came no
nearer to success. The lady said “Armorica,”
as if she were speaking of
ancient Brittany. The gentleman said
“Amurrica,” probably to make himself
intelligible to the large and patriotic
audiences which he addressed so
frequently and so successfully. The
license allowed to youth may be held
accountable for such Puck’s tricks as
these, as well as for grammatical lapses.
A superintendent of public schools in
Illinois has decided on his own authority
that common usage may supplant
time-worn rules of speech; and that
such a sentence as “It is I,” being
“outlawed” by common usage, need
no longer be forced upon children who
prefer to say “It is me.”

[Pg 267]

Because the direct products of education
are so limited, and the by-products
of such notable importance,
we permit ourselves to speak contemptuously
concerning things which
must be learned from books, without
any deep understanding of things which
must be learned from people armed
with books, and backed by the authority
of tradition. When Goethe said
that the education of an Englishman
gave him courage to be what nature
had made him, he illuminated, after
his wont, a somewhat shadowy subject.
William James struck the same note,
and amplified it, not too exhaustively,
in “Talks to Teachers”: “An English
gentleman is a bundle of specifically
qualified reactions, a creature who, for
all the emergencies of life, has his line
of behaviour distinctly marked out
for him in advance.”

If this be the result of a system which,
to learned Germans, lucid Frenchmen,
[Pg 268]

and progressive Americans, has seemed
inadequate, they may revise, or at
least suspend, their judgment. And
Englishmen who have humorously lamented
the wasted years of youth
(“May I be taught Greek in the next
world if I know what I
did
learn at
school!” said the novelist, James Payn),
need no longer be under the obligation
of expressing more dissatisfaction than
they feel.

In the United States the educational
by-products are less clear-cut, because
the force of tradition is weaker, and
because too many boys are taught too
long by women. The difficulty of obtaining
male teachers has accustomed
us to this anomaly, and we have even
been heard to murmur sweet phrases
concerning the elevating nature of
feminine influence. But the fact remains
that a boy is destined to grow
into a man, and for this contingency no
woman can prepare him. Only men,
[Pg 269]

and men of purpose and principle, can
harden him into the mould of manhood.
It is a question of character, which
great by-product of education cannot
be safely undervalued even in a busy
and clever age. “It was always through
enfeeblement of character,” says Gustave
Le Bon, “and not through enfeeblement
of intellect, that the great
peoples disappeared from history.”

And this truth paves the way for an
assertion which, however controvertible,
is not without strong support. Of
all the direct products of education (of
education as an end in itself, and not
as an approach to something else), a
knowledge of history is most essential.
So, at least, it seems to me, though I
speak with diffidence, being well aware
that makers of history, writers of history,
and teachers of history, have
agreed that it is an elusive, deceptive
and disputable study. Yet it is the
heart of all things, and every intellectual
[Pg 270]

by-path leads to this central
theme. Most firmly do I believe with
“the little Queen-Anne man” that

“The proper study of mankind is man”;

and how shall we reach him save
through the pages of history? It is the
foundation upon which are reared the
superstructures of sociology, psychology,
philosophy and ethics. It is our
clue to the problems of the race. It is
the gateway through which we glimpse
the noble and terrible things which
have stirred the human soul.

A cultivated American poet has said
that men of his craft “should know
history inside out, and take as much
interest in the days of Nebuchadnezzar
as in the days of Pierpont Morgan.”
This is a spacious demand. The vast
sweep of time is more than one man can
master, and the poet is absolved by the
terms of his art from severe study. He
may know as much history as Matthew
[Pg 271]

Arnold, or as little as Herrick, who lived
through great episodes, and did not
seem to be aware of them. But Mr.
Benét is wise in recognizing the inspiration
of history, its emotional and
imaginative appeal. New York and
Pierpont Morgan have their tale to tell;
and so has the dark shadow of the
Babylonian conqueror, who was so
feared that, while he lived, his subjects
dared not laugh; and when he died, and
went to his appointed place, the poor
inmates of Hell trembled lest he had
come to rule over them in place of their
master, Satan.

“The study of Plutarch and ancient
historians,” says George Trevelyan,
“rekindled the breath of liberty and of
civic virtue in modern Europe.” The
mental freedom of the Renaissance was
the gift of the long-ignored and reinstated
classics, of a renewed and generous
belief in the vitality of human
thought, the richness of human experience.
[Pg 272]

Apart from the intellectual precision
which this kind of knowledge
confers, it is indirectly as useful as a
knowledge of mathematics or of chemistry.
How shall one nation deal with
another in this heaving and turbulent
world unless it knows something of
more importance than its neighbour’s
numerical and financial strength—namely,
the type of men it breeds. This
is what history teaches, if it is studied
carefully and candidly.

How did it happen that the Germans,
so well informed on every other point,
wrought their own ruin because they
failed to understand the mental and
moral make-up of Frenchmen, Englishmen
and Americans? What kind of
histories did they have, and in what
spirit did they study them? The Scarborough
raid proved them as ignorant
as children of England’s temper
and reactions. The inhibitions imposed
upon the port of New York, and the
[Pg 273]

semi-occasional ship which they granted
us leave to send from it, proved them
more ignorant than kittens of America’s
liveliest idiosyncrasies.

In the United States an impression
prevails that the annals of Asia and of
Europe are too long and too complicated
for our consideration. Every now
and then some educator, or some politician
who controls educators, makes the
“practical” suggestion that no history
prior to the American Revolution shall
be taught in the public schools. Every
now and then some able financier
affirms that he would not give a fig for

any
history, and marshals the figures of
his income to prove its uselessness.

Yet our vast heterogeneous population
is forever providing problems
which call for an historical solution;
and our foreign relations would be
clarified by a greater accuracy of knowledge.
To the ignorance of the average
Congressman and of the average Senator
[Pg 274]

must be traced their most conspicuous
blunders. Back of every man
lies the story of his race. The Negro is
more than a voter. He has a history
which may be ascertained without
undue effort. Haiti, San Domingo,
Liberia, all have their tales to tell.
The Irishman is more than a voter.
He has a long, interesting and instructive
history. It pays us to be well informed
about these things. “The passionate
cry of ignorance for power”
rises in our ears like the death-knell of
civilization. Down through the ages it
has sounded, now covetous and threatening,
now irrepressible and triumphant.
We know what every one of its
conquests has cost the human race; yet
we are content to rest our security upon
oratorical platitudes and generalities,
upon the dim chance of a man being
reborn in the sacrament of citizenship.

In addition to the things that it is
useful to know, there are things that it
[Pg 275]

is pleasant to know, and pleasure is a
very important by-product of education.
It has been too long the fashion
to deny, or at least to decry, this species
of enjoyment. “He that increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow,” says
Ecclesiastes; and Sir Thomas Browne
musically bewails the dark realities with
which “the unhappiness of our knowledge
too nearly acquainteth us.” But
it was probably the things he did,
rather than the things he knew, which
soured the taste of life in the Hebrew’s
mouth; and as for Sir Thomas Browne,
no man ever derived a more lasting
satisfaction from scholarship. His erudition,
like his religion, was pure profit.
His temperament saved him from the
loudness of controversy. His life was
rich within.

This mental ease is not so much an
essential of education as the reward of
education. It makes smooth the reader’s
path; it involves the capacity to
[Pg 276]

think, and to take delight in thinking;
it is the keynote of subtle and animated
talk. It presupposes a somewhat varied
list of acquirements; but it has no official
catalogue, and no market value.
It emphatically does not consist in
knowing inventories of things, useful
or otherwise; still less in imparting this
knowledge to the world. Macaulay,
Croker, and Lord Brougham were men
who knew things on a somewhat grand
scale, and imparted them with impressive
accuracy; yet they were the blight
rather than the spur of conversation.
Even the “more cultivated portion of
the ignorant,” to borrow a phrase of
Stevenson’s, is hostile to lectures, unless
the lecturer has the guarantee of a
platform, and his audience sits before
him in serried and somnolent rows.

The decline and fall of the classics
has not been unattended by controversy.
No other educational system
was ever so valiantly and nobly defended.
[Pg 277]

For no other have so many
masterly arguments been marshalled
in vain. There was a pride and a
splendour in the long years’ study of
Greek. It indicated in England that
the nation had reached a height which
permitted her this costly inutility, this
supreme intellectual indulgence. Greek
was an adornment to the minds of her
men, as jewels were an adornment to
the bodies of her women. No practical
purpose was involved. Sir Walter
Scott put the case with his usual simplicity
and directness in a letter to his
second son, Charles, who had little
aptitude for study: “A knowledge of
the classical languages has been fixed
upon, not without good reason, as the
mark of a well-educated young man;
and though people may scramble into
distinction without it, it is always with
difficulty, just like climbing over a wall
instead of giving your ticket at the
door.”

[Pg 278]

In the United States we have never
been kindly disposed towards extravagance
of this order. During the years
of our comparative poverty, when few
citizens aspired to more than a competence,
there was still money enough
for Latin, and now and then for Greek.
There was still a race of men with
slender incomes and wide acquirements,
to whom scholarship was a dearly
bought but indestructible delight. Now
that we have all the money there is, it is
universally understood that Americans
cannot afford to spend any of it on the
study of “the best that has been known
and thought in the world.”

Against this practical decision no
argument avails. Burke’s plea for the
severity of the foundation upon which
rest the principles of taste carries little
weight, because our standard of taste
is genial rather than severe. The influence
of Latinity upon English literature
concerns us even less, because
[Pg 279]

prose and verse are emancipated from
the splendid shackles they wore with
such composure. But the mere reader,
who is not an educational economist,
asks himself now and then in what
fashion Milton and Dryden would have
written, if vocational training had
supplanted the classics in their day.
And to come nearer to our time, and
closer to our modern and moderate
appreciations, how would the “Elegy
Written in a Country Churchyard,”
and the lines “On the Death of a
Favourite Cat” have been composed,
had Gray not spent all his life in the
serene company of the Latins?

It was easy to define the requirements
of an educated man in the year 1738,
when Gray, a bad mathematician and
an admirable classicist, left Cambridge.
It is uncommonly difficult to define
them to-day. Dr. Goodnow, speaking
a few years ago to the graduating class
of Johns Hopkins University, summed
[Pg 280]

up collegiate as well as professional
education as the acquisition of the
capacity to do work of a specific character.
“Knowledge can come only
as the result of experience. What is
learned in any other way seldom has
such reality as to make it an actual
part of our lives.”

A doctor cannot afford to depend too
freely on experience, valuable though
it may be, because the high prices it
asks are paid by his patients. But so
far as professional training goes, Dr.
Goodnow stood on firm ground. All it
undertakes to do is to enable students
to work along chosen lines—to turn
them into doctors, lawyers, priests,
mining engineers, analytical chemists,
expert accountants. They may or may
not be educated men in the liberal sense
of the word. They may or may not
understand allusions which are current
in the conversation of educated people.
Such conversation is far from encyclopædic;
[Pg 281]

but it is interwoven with knowledge,
and rich in agreeable disclosures.
An adroit participant can avoid obvious
pitfalls; but it is not in dodging issues
and concealing deficits that the pleasures
of companionship lie. I once heard
a sparkling and animated lady ask Mr.
Henry James (who abhorred being
questioned) if he did not think American
women talked better than English
women. “Yes,” said the great novelist
gently, “they are more ready and much
more brilliant. They rise to every
suggestion. But”—as if moved by
some strain of recollection—“English
women so often know what they are
talking about.”

Vocational training and vocational
guidance are a little like intensive
farming. They are obvious measures
for obvious results; they economize
effort; they keep their goal in view. If
they “pander to cabbages,” they produce
as many and as fine cabbages as
[Pg 282]

the soil they till can yield. Their
exponents are most convincing when
they are least imaginative. The Dean
of Harvard’s Graduate School of Business
Administration says bluntly that
it is hard for a young man to see any
good in a college education, when he
finds he has nothing to offer which business
men want.

This is an intelligible point of view.
It shows, as I have said, that the country
does not feel itself rich enough for
intellectual luxuries. But when I see it
asserted that vocational training is
necessary for the safety of Democracy
(the lusty nursling which we persist in
feeding from the bottle), I feel that I
am asked to credit an absurdity. When
the reason given for this dependence is
the altruism of labour,—“In a democracy
the activity of the people is
directed towards the good of the whole
number,”—I know that common sense
has been violated by an assertion which
[Pg 283]

no one is expected to take seriously. A
life-career course may be established in
every college in the land, and students
carefully guarded from the inroads of
distracting and unremunerative knowledge;
but this praiseworthy thrift will
not be practised in the interests of
the public. The mechanical education,
against which Mr. Lowell has protested
sharply, is preëminently selfish. Its
impelling motive is not “going over,”
but getting on.

“It takes a much better quality of
mind for self-education than for education
in the ordinary sense,” says Mrs.
Gerould; and no one will dispute this
truth. Franklin had two years of
schooling, and they were over and done
with before he was twelve. His “cultural
opportunities” were richer than
those enjoyed by Mr. Gompers, and he
had a consuming passion for knowledge.
Vocational training was a simple thing
in his day; but he glimpsed its possibilities,
[Pg 284]

and fitted it into place. He
would have made an admirable “vocational
counsellor” in the college he
founded, had his counsels not been
needed on weightier matters, and in
wider spheres. As for industrial education,
those vast efficiency courses given
by leading manufacturers to their employees,
which embrace an astonishing
variety of marketable attainments, they
would have seemed to him like the
realization of a dream—a dream of
diffused light and general intelligence.

We stand to-day on an educational
no man’s land, exposed to double fires,
and uncertain which way to turn for
safety. The elimination of Greek from
the college curriculum blurred the high
light, the supreme distinction, of scholarship.
The elimination of Latin as an
essential study leaves us without any
educational standard save a correct
knowledge of English, a partial knowledge
of modern languages, and some
[Pg 285]

acquaintance, never clearly defined,
with precise academic studies. The
scientist discards many of these studies
as not being germane to his subject.
The professional student deals with
them as charily as possible. The future
financier fears to embarrass his mind
with things he does not need to know.

Yet back of every field of labour lies
the story of the labourer, and back of
every chapter in the history of civilization
lie the chapters that elucidate it.
“Wisdom,” says Santayana, “is the
funded experience which mankind has
gathered by living.” Education gives
to a student that fraction of knowledge
which sometimes leads to understanding
and a clean-cut basis of opinions.
The process is engrossing, and, to certain
minds, agreeable and consolatory.
Man contemplates his fellow man with
varied emotions, but never with unconcern.
“The world,” observed Bagehot
tersely, “has a vested interest in itself.”

[Pg 286]

The American Laughs

It was the opinion of Thomas Love
Peacock—who knew whereof he
spoke—that “no man should ask
another why he laughs, or at what,
seeing that he does not always know,
and that, if he does, he is not a responsible
agent.... Reason is in no way
essential to mirth.”

This being so, why should human
beings, individually and collectively, be
so contemptuous of one another’s humour?
To be puzzled by it is natural
enough. There is nothing in the world
so incomprehensible as the joke we do
not see. But to be scornful or angry, to
say with Steele that we can judge a
man’s temper by the things he laughs
at, is, in a measure, unreasonable. A
man laughs as he loves, moved by
secret springs that do not affect his
neighbour. Yet no sooner did America
[Pg 287]

begin to breed humorists of her own
than the first thing these gentlemen did
was to cast doubts upon British humour.
Even a cultivated laugher like
Mr. Charles Dudley Warner suffered
himself to become acrimonious on this
subject; whereupon an English critic
retaliated by saying that if Mr. Warner
considered Knickerbocker’s “New
York” to be the equal of “Gulliver’s
Travels,” and that if Mr. Lowell really
thought Mr. N. P. Willis “witty,” then
there was no international standard of
satire or of wit. The chances are that
Mr. Lowell did not think Mr. Willis
witty at all. He used the word in a
friendly and unreflecting moment, not
expecting a derisive echo from the other
side of the sea.

And now Mr. Chesterton has protested
in the “Illustrated London
News” against the vogue of the American
joke in England. He says it does
not convey its point because the conditions
[Pg 288]

which give it birth are not understood,
and the side-light it throws fails
to illuminate a continent. One must be
familiar with the intimacies of American
life to enjoy their humorous aspect.

Precisely the same criticism was
offered when Artemus Ward lectured
in London more than a half-century
ago. The humour of this once famous
joker has become a disputable point.
It is safe to say that anything less amusing
than the passage read by Lincoln to
his Cabinet in Mr. Drinkwater’s play
could not be found in the literature of
any land. It cast a needless gloom over
the scene, and aroused our sympathy
for the officials who had to listen to it.
But the American jest, like the Greek
epic, should be spoken, not read; and it
is claimed that when Artemus Ward
drawled out his absurdities, which, like
the Greek epic, were always subject to
change, these absurdities were funny.
Mr. Leacock has politely assured us
[Pg 289]

that London was “puzzled and enraptured
with the very mystery of the
humour”; but Mr. Leacock, being at
that time three years old, was not there
to discern this for himself. Dr. S.
Weir Mitchell
was
there on the opening
night, November 13, 1866, and found
the puzzle and the mystery to be far in
advance of the rapture. The description
he was wont to give of this unique
entertainment (a “Panorama,” and a
lecture on the Mormons), of the depressing,
unventilated Egyptian Hall
in which it was given, of the wild extravagances
of the speaker, which grew
wilder and wilder as the audience grew
more and more bewildered, was funny
enough, Heaven knows, but the essence
of the fun lay in failure.

Americans, sixty years ago, were
brought up on polygamous jests. The
Mormons were our neighbours, and
could be always relied upon to furnish
a scandal, a thrill, or a joke. When
[Pg 290]

they mended their ways, and ceased to
be reprehensible or amusing, the comic
papers were compelled to fall back on
Solomon, with whose marital experiences
they have regaled us ever since.
But to British eyes, Brigham Young
was an unfamiliar figure; and to British
minds, Solomon has always been distinguished
for other things than wives.
Therefore Artemus Ward’s casual drolleries
presupposed a humorous background
which did not exist. A chance
allusion to a young friend in Salt Lake
City who had run away with a boarding
school was received in stupefied
silence. Then suddenly a woman’s
smothered giggle showed that light had
dawned on one receptive brain. Then
a few belated laughs broke out in various
parts of the hall, as the idea travelled
slowly along the thought currents
of the audience, and the speaker went
languidly on to the next unrecognizable
pleasantry.

[Pg 291]

The criticism passed upon Americans
to-day is that they laugh often and
without discrimination. This is what
the English say of us, and this is what
some Americans have said of the English.
Henry James complained bitterly
that London play-goers laughed unseasonably
at serious plays. I wonder if
they received Ervine’s “John Ferguson”
in this fashion, as did American
play-goers. That a tragedy harsh and
unrelenting, that human pain, unbearable
because unmerited, should furnish
food for mirth may be comprehensible
to the psychologist who claims to have
a clue to every emotion; but to the ordinary
mortal it is simply dumbfounding.
People laughed at Molnar’s “Liliom”
out of sheer nervousness, because they
could not understand it. And “Liliom”
had its comedy side. But nobody
could have helped understanding “John
Ferguson,” and there was no relief from
its horror, its pitifulness, its sombre
[Pg 292]

surrender to the irony of fate. Yet
ripples of laughter ran through the
house; and the actress who played Hannah
Ferguson confessed that this laughter
had in the beginning completely
unnerved her, but that she had steeled
herself to meet and to ignore it.

It was said that British audiences
were guilty of laughing at “Hedda
Gabler,” perhaps in sheer desperate
impatience at the unreasonableness of
human nature as unfolded in that despairing
drama. They should have been
forgiven and congratulated, and so
should the American audiences who
were reproached for laughing at “Mary
Rose.” The charm, the delicacy, the
tragic sense of an unknown and arbitrary
power with which Barrie invested
his play were lost in the hands of incapable
players, while its native dullness
gained force and substance from
their presentation. A lengthy dialogue
on a pitch-black stage between an invisible
[Pg 293]

soldier and an inarticulate ghost
was neither enlivening nor terrifying.
It would have been as hard to laugh as
to shudder in the face of such tedious
loquacity.

We see it often asserted that Continental
play-goers are incapable of the
gross stupidities ascribed to English
and Americans, that they dilate with
correct emotions at correct moments,
that they laugh, weep, tremble, and
even faint in perfect accord with the
situations of the drama they are witnessing.
When Maeterlinck’s “Intruder”
was played in Paris, women
fainted; when it was played in Philadelphia,
they tittered. Perhaps the
quality of the acting may account for
these varying receptions. A tense situation,
imperfectly presented, degenerates
swiftly into farce—into very bad farce,
too, as Swift said of the vulgar malignities
of fate.

The Dublin players brought to this
[Pg 294]

country a brand of humour and pathos
with which we were unfamiliar. Irish
comedy, as we knew it, was of the Dion
Boucicault type, a pure product of
stageland, and unrelated to any practical
experiences of life. Here, on the
contrary, was something indigenous to
Ireland, and therefore strange to us.
My first experience was at the opening
night of Ervine’s “Mixed Marriage,”
in New York. An audience, exclusively
Semitic (so far as I could judge by looking
at it), listened in patient bewilderment
to the theological bickerings of
Catholics and Protestants in Belfast.
I sat in a box with Lady Gregory who
was visibly disturbed by the slowness
of the house at the uptake, and unaware
that what was so familiar and
vital to her was a matter of the purest
unconcern to that particular group of
Americans. The only thing that roused
them from their apathy was the sudden
rage with which, in the third act, Tom
[Pg 295]

Rainey shouted at his father: “Ye’re
an ould fool, that’s what ye are; a
damned ould fool!” At these reprehensible
words a gust of laughter swept
the theatre, destroying the situation
on the stage, but shaking the audience
back to life and animation. It was
seemingly—though I should be sorry
to think it—the touch of nature which
makes the whole world kin.

When that mad medley of fun and
fancy, of grossness and delicacy, “The
Playboy of the Western World,” was
put on the American stage, men
laughed—generally at the wrong time—out
of the hopeless confusion of their
minds. The “Playboy” was admittedly
an enigma. The night I saw it, the
audience, under the impression that
it was anti-Irish, or anti-Catholic, or
anti-moral, or anti-something, they
were not sure what, hurled denunciations
and one missile—which looked
strangely like a piece of pie—at the
[Pg 296]

actors. It was a disgraceful scene, but
not without its humorous side; for
when the riotous interruptions had
subsided, an elderly man arose, and,
with the manner of an invited speaker
at a public dinner, began, “From time
immemorial”—But the house had
grown tired of disturbances, and howled
him down. He waited for silence, and
then in the same composed and leisurely
manner began again, “From
time immemorial”—At this point one
of the policemen who had been restoring
order led him gently but forcibly
out of the theatre; the play was resumed;
and what it was that had happened
from time immemorial we were
destined never to know.

A source of superlative merriment in
the United States is the two-reel comic
of our motion-picture halls. Countless
thousands of Americans look at it, and
presumably laugh at it, every twenty-four
hours. It is not unlike an amplified
[Pg 297]

and diversified Punch and Judy show,
depending on incessant action and
plenty of hard knocks. Hazlitt says
that bangs and blows which we know
do not hurt provoke legitimate laughter;
and, until we see a funny film, we
have no conception of the amount of
business which can be constructed out
of anything so simple as men hitting
one another. Producers of these comics
have taken the public into their confidence,
and have assured us that their
work is the hardest in the motion-picture
industry; that the slugging policeman
is trained for weary weeks to
slug divertingly, and that every tumble
has to be practised with sickening monotony
before it acquires its purely
accidental character. As for accessories—well,
it takes more time and
trouble to make a mouse run up a
woman’s skirt at the right moment, or
a greyhound carry off a dozen crullers
on its tail, than it does to turn out a
[Pg 298]

whole sentimental scenario, grey-haired
mother, high-minded, pure-hearted convict
son, lumber-camp virtue, town
vice, and innocent childhood complete.
Whether or not the time and trouble
are well spent depends on the amount
of money which that mouse and those
crullers eventually wring from an appreciative
and laughter-loving public.

The dearth of humorous situations—at
no time inexhaustible—has compelled
the two-reel comic to depend on
such substitutes as speed, violence, and
a succession of well-nigh inconceivable
mishaps. A man acting in one cannot
open a door, cross a street, or sit down
to dinner without coming to grief.
Even the animals—dogs, donkeys
and pigs—are subject to catastrophes
that must wreck their confidence in life.
Fatness, besides being funny, is, under
these circumstances, a great protection.
The human body, swathed in rolls of
cotton-wadding, is safe from contusions
[Pg 299]

and broken bones. When an immensely
stout lady sinks into an armchair, only
to be precipitated through a trap-door,
and shot down a slide into a pond, we
feel she has earned her pay. But after
she has been dropped from a speeding
motor, caught and lifted high in air
by a balloon anchor, let down to earth
with a parachute, picked up by an elephant,
and carried through the streets
at the head of a circus parade, we begin
to understand the arduousness of art.
Only the producers of comic “movies”
know what “One crowded hour of glorious
life” can be made to hold.

Laughter has been over-praised and
over-analyzed, as well as unreasonably
denounced. We do not think much
about its determining causes—why
should we?—until the contradictory
definitions of philosophers, psychologists
and men of letters compel us to
recognize its inscrutable quality. Plato
laid down the principle that our pleasure
[Pg 300]

in the ludicrous originates in the
sight of another’s misfortune. Its motive
power is malice. Hobbes stoutly
affirmed that laughter is not primarily
malicious, but vainglorious. It is
the rough, spontaneous assertion of
our own eminence. “We laugh from
strength, and we laugh at weakness.”
Hazlitt saw a lurking cruelty in the
amusement of civilized men who have
gaged the folly and frivolity of their
kind. Bergson, who evidently does not
frequent motion-picture halls, says that
the comic makes its appeal to “the intelligence
pure and simple.” He raises
laughter to the dignity of a “social
gesture” and a corrective. We put our
affections out of court, and impose silence
upon our pity before we laugh;
but this is only because the corrective
would fail to correct if it bore the stamp
of sympathy and kindness. Leacock,
who deals in comics, is sure of but one
thing, that all humour is anti-social;
[Pg 301]

and Stevenson ascribes our indestructible
spirit of mirth to “the unplumbed
childishness of man’s imagination.”

The illustrations given us by these
eminent specialists are as unconvincing
as the definitions they vouchsafe, and
the rules they lay down for our guidance.
Whenever we are told that a
situation or a jest offers legitimate food
for laughter, we cease to have any disposition
to laugh. Just as we are often
moved to merriment for no other reason
than that the occasion calls for
seriousness, so we are correspondingly
serious when invited too freely to be
amused. An entertainment which
promises to be funny is handicapped
from the start. It has to plough deep
into men’s risibilities before it can
raise its crop of laughter. I have been
told that when Forepaugh first fired a
man out of a cannon, the audience
laughed convulsively; not because it
found anything ludicrous in the performance,
[Pg 302]

but because it had been
startled out of its composure, and relieved
from a gasping sense of fear.

Sidney Smith insisted that the overturning
of a dinner-table which had
been set for dinner was a laughable incident.
Yet he was a married man, and
must have known that such a catastrophe
(which seems to us to belong
strictly to the motion-picture field)
could not have been regarded by Mrs.
Smith, or by any other hostess, as
amusing. Boswell tells us that Dr.
Johnson was so infinitely diverted by
hearing that an English gentleman had
left his estate to his three sisters that he
laughed until he was exhausted, and
had to hold on to a post (he was walking
home through the London streets)
to keep himself from falling to the
ground. Yet no reader of Boswell
ever saw anything ludicrous in such
a last will and testament. Sophocles
makes Electra describe Clytemnestra as
[Pg 303]

“laughing triumphantly” over the
murder of Agamemnon; but Electra
was a prejudiced witness. Killing an
undesired husband is no laughing matter,
though triumph over its accomplishment—when
failure means death—is
a legitimate emotion. Clytemnestra
was a singularly august and
composed sinner. Not from her did
Orestes and Electra inherit their nervous
systems; and not on their testimony
should we credit her with an excess of
humour alike ill-timed and unbecoming.

In our efforts to discover what can
never be discovered—the secret sources
of laughter—we have experimented
with American children; testing their
appreciation of the ludicrous by giving
them blocks which, when fitted into
place, display absurd and incongruous
pictures. Their reactions to this artificial
stimulus are of value, only when
they are old enough for perception, and
young enough for candour. The merriment
[Pg 304]

of children, of little girls especially,
is often unreal and affected.
They will toss their heads and stimulate
one another to peals of laughter
which are a pure make-believe. When
they are really absorbed in their play,
and astir with delicious excitation, they
do not laugh; they give vent to piercing
shrieks which sound as if they were
being cut into little pieces. These
shrieks are the spontaneous expression
of delight; but their sense of absurdity,
which implies a sense of humour, is
hard to capture before it has become
tainted with pretence.

There are American newspapers
which print every day a sheet or a half-sheet
of comic pictures, and there are
American newspapers which print every
Sunday a coloured comic supplement.
These sincere attempts to divert the
public are well received. Their vulgarity
does not offend. “What,” asks
the wise Santayana, “can we relish if
[Pg 305]

we recoil at vulgarity?” Their dullness
is condoned. Life, for all its antics, is
confessedly dull. Our absurdities may
amuse the angels (Walpole had a cheerful
vision of their laughter); but they
cannot be relied on to amuse our fellow
men. Nevertheless the coloured supplement
passes from hand to hand—from
parents to children, from children
to servants. Even the smudgy black
and whites of the daily press are soberly
and conscientiously scrutinized. A man,
reading his paper in the train, seldom
skips that page. He examines every
little smudge with attention, not seemingly
entertained, or seeking entertainment,
but without visible depression at
its incompetence.

I once had the pleasure of hearing a
distinguished etcher lecture on the art
of illustrating. He said some harsh
words about these American comics,
and threw on the screen a reproduction
of one of their most familiar series.
[Pg 306]

The audience looked at it sadly. “I am
glad,” commented the lecturer, “that
you did not laugh. Those pictures are,
as you perceive, as stupid as they are
vulgar. Now I will show you some
clever English work”: and there appeared
before us the once famous Ally
Sloper recreating himself and his family
at the seashore. The audience looked
at him sadly. A solemn stillness held
the hall. “Why don’t you laugh?”
asked the lecturer irritably. “I assure
you that picture
is
funny.” Whereupon
everybody laughed; not because we saw
the fun—which was not there to see—but
because we were jolted into risibility
by the unwarranted despotism of
the demand.

The prohibition jest which stands preeminent
in the United States, and has
afforded French and English humorists
a field which they have promptly
and ably filled, draws its vitality from
the inexhaustible springs of human
[Pg 307]

nature. Readers and play-goers profess
themselves tired of it; moralists
deprecate its undermining qualities;
but the conflict between a normal desire
and an interdict is too unadjustable,
too rich in circumstance, and too far-reaching
in results, to be accepted in
sober silence. The complications incidental
to prohibition, the battle of wits,
the turns of the game, the adventures—often
sorry enough—of the players, all
present the essential elements of comedy.
Mrs. Gerould has likened the
situation to an obstacle race. It is that,
and it is something more. In earlier,
easier days, robbery was made justifiably
droll. The master thief was
equally at home in northern Europe
and in the far East. England smiled at
Robin Hood. France evolved that
amazing epithet, “chevalier d’industrie.”
But arrayed against robbery
were a moral law and a commandment.
Arrayed against wine are a legal ordinance
[Pg 308]

and the modern cult of efficiency.
It will be long before these become so
sacrosanct as to disallow a laugh.

The worst that has been said of
legitimate American humour is that it
responds to every beck and call. Even
Mr. Ewan S. Agnew, whose business
it is to divert the British public, considers
that the American public is too
easily diverted. We laugh, either from
light-hearted insensitiveness, or from
the superabundant vitality, the half-conscious
sense of power, which bubbles
up forever in the callous gaiety of the
world. Certainly Emerson is the only
known American who despised jocularity,
and who said early and often that
he did not wish to be amused. The
most striking passage in the letters of
Mr. Walter Page is the one which describes
his distaste for the “jocular”
Washington luncheons at which he was
a guest in the summer of 1916. He had
come fresh from the rending anxiety,
[Pg 309]

the heroic stress and strain of London;
and the cloudless atmosphere of our
capital wounded his spirit. England
jested too. “Punch” had never been
so brilliant as in the torturing years of
war. But England had earned the right
to jest. There was a tonic quality in
her laughter. Page feared from the
bottom of his soul lest the great peaceful
nation, safe, rich and debonair, had
suffered her “mental neutrality” to
blot out from her vision the agony of
Europe, and the outstanding facts
which were responsible for the disaster.

This unconcern, which is the balance
wheel of comedy, has tempered the
American mind to an easy acceptance
of chance. Its enthusiasms are modified,
its censures are softened by a restraining
humour which is rooted deeply
in indifference. We recognize the sanity
of our mental attitude, but not its
incompleteness. Understanding and
sympathy are products of civilized life,
[Pg 310]

as clarifying in their way as tolerance
and a quick perception of the ludicrous.
An American newspaper printed recently
a photograph entitled “Smilin’
Through,” which showed two American
girls peering through two holes in a
shell-torn wall of Verdun, and laughing
broadly at their sport. The names and
addresses of these frolicsome young
women were given, and their enjoyment
of their own drollery was emphasized
for the diversion of other young
women at home.

Now granted that every nation, like
every man, bears the burden of its own
grief. Granted also that every woman,
like every man, has her own conception
of the humorous, and that we cannot
reasonably take umbrage because we
fail to see the fun. Nevertheless the
memories of Verdun do not make for
laughter. There is that in its story
which sobers the world it has ennobled.
Four hundred thousand French soldiers
[Pg 311]

gave their lives for that battered fortress
which saved Paris and France.
Mr. Brownell reminds us that there is
such a thing as rectitude outside the
sphere of morals, and that it is precisely
this austere element in taste which assures
our self-respect. We cannot analyze,
and therefore cannot criticize,
that frothy fun which Bergson has
likened to the foam which the receding
waves leave on the ocean sands; but we
know, as he knows, that the substance
is scanty, and the after-taste is bitter
in our mouths. We are tethered to our
kind, and it is the sureness of our reaction
to the great and appealing facts
of history which makes us inheritors
of a hard-won civilization, and qualified
citizens of the world.

[Pg 312]

The Idolatrous Dog

We shall never know why a feeling
of shame attends certain harmless
sensations, certain profoundly innocent
tastes and distastes. Why, for
example, are we abashed when we are
cold, and boastful when we are not?
There is no merit or distinction in
being insensitive to cold, or in wearing
thinner clothing than one’s neighbour.
And what strange impulse is it
which induces otherwise truthful people
to say they like music when they do not,
and thus expose themselves to hours of
boredom? We are not necessarily morons
or moral lepers because we have no
ear for harmony. It is a significant
circumstance that Shakespeare puts his
intolerant lines,

“The man that hath no music in himself,

Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,

Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils.

Let no such man be trusted”—

[Pg 313]

in the mouth of Lorenzo who disdained
neither stratagems nor spoils, and who
carried off the Jew’s ducats as well as
the Jew’s daughter. And Jessica, who
sits by his side in the moonlight, and
responds with delicate grace

“I am never merry when I hear sweet music,”

is the girl who “gilded” herself with
stolen gold, and gave her dead mother’s
ring for a monkey.

It is a convenience not to feel cold
when the thermometer falls, and it is a
pleasure to listen appreciatively to a
symphony concert. It is also a convenience
to relish the proximity of dogs,
inasmuch as we live surrounded by
these animals, and it is a pleasure to
respond to their charm. But there is no
virtue in liking them, any more than
there is virtue in liking wintry weather
or stringed instruments. An affection
for dogs is not, as we have been given
to understand, a test of an open and
[Pg 314]

generous disposition. Still less is their
affection for us to be accepted as a
guarantee of our integrity. The assumption
that a dog knows a good from
a bad human being when he sees one is
unwarranted. It is part of that engulfing
wave of sentiment which swept
the world in the wake of popular fiction.
Dickens is its most unflinching exponent.
Henry Gowan’s dog, Lion, springs
at the throat of Blandois, alias Lagnier,
alias Rigaud, for no other reason than
that he recognizes him as a villain,
without whom the world would be a
safer and better place to live in. Florence
Dombey’s dog, Diogenes, looks
out of an upper window, observes Mr.
Carker peacefully walking the London
streets, and tries to jump down and
bite him then and there. He sees at
once what Mr. Dombey has not found
out in years—that Carker is a base
wretch, unworthy of the confidence reposed
in him.

[Pg 315]

A few animals of this kind might, in
real life, close the courts of justice. The
Dickens dog is detective, prosecuting
attorney, judge, jury and executioner,
all in one. He stands responsible for a
whole school of fictitious canines who
combine the qualities of Vidocq, Sherlock
Holmes, and the Count of Monte
Cristo. I read recently a story in which
the villain was introduced as “that
anomalous being, the man who doesn’t
like dogs.” After that, no intelligent
reader could have been unprepared to
find him murdering his friend and partner.
So much was inevitable. And no
experienced reader could have been
unprepared for the behaviour of the
friend and partner’s dog, which recognizes
the anomaly as a person likely
to commit murder, and, without wasting
time on circumstantial evidence,
tracks him down, and, unaided, brings
him to his death. A simple, clean-cut
retribution, contrasting favourably
[Pg 316]

with the cumbersome processes of
law.

A year ago the Governor of Maine
had the misfortune to lose his dog. He
signified his sense of loss, and his appreciation
of the animal’s good qualities,
by lowering the American flag on
the Augusta State House to half-mast.
He was able to do this because he was
Governor, and there was no one to say
him nay. Nevertheless, certain sticklers
for formality protested against an
innovation which opened up strange
possibilities for the future; and one
logical lady observed that a dog was no
more a citizen than was a strawberry
patch, a statement not open to contradiction.
The country at large, however,
supported the Governor’s action. Newspaper
men wrote editorials lauding the
“homespun” virtues of an official who
set a true value on an honest dog’s
affection. Poets wrote verses about
“Old Glory” and “Garry” (the dog’s
[Pg 317]

name); and described Saint Peter as
promptly investing this worthy quadruped
with the citizenship of Heaven.
The propriety or impropriety of lowering
the national flag for an animal—which
was the question under dispute—was
buried beneath the avalanche of
sentiment which is always ready to fall
at the sound of a dog’s name.

A somewhat similar gust of criticism
swept Pennsylvania when a resident of
that State spent five hundred dollars on
the obsequies of his dog. The Great
War, though drawing to a close, was
not yet over, and perhaps the thought
of men unburied on the battle-field, and
refugees starving for bread, intensified
public feeling. There was the usual
outcry, as old as Christianity—“this
might have been given to the poor.”
There was the usual irrelevant laudation
of the Pennsylvania dog, and of
dogs in general. People whose own affairs
failed to occupy their attention
[Pg 318]

(there are many such) wrote vehement
letters to the daily press. At last a
caustic reader chilled the agitation by
announcing that he was prepared to
give five hundred dollars any day for
the privilege of burying his next-door
neighbour’s dog. Whether or not this
offer was accepted, the public never
knew; but what troubled days and
sleepless nights must have prompted
its prodigality!

The honour accorded to the dog is
no new thing. It has for centuries rewarded
his valour and fidelity. Responsibilities,
duties, compensations—these
have always been his portion.
Sirius shines in the heavens, and Cerberus
guards in hell. The dog, Katmir,
who watched over the Seven Sleepers
for three hundred and nine years,
gained Paradise for his pains, as well
he might. Even the ill-fated hounds of
Actæon, condemned to kill their more
ill-fated master, are in some sort immortal,
[Pg 319]

inasmuch as we may know, if
we choose, the names of every one of
them. Through the long pages of
legend and romance the figure of the
dog is clearly outlined; and when history
begins with man’s struggle for
existence, the dog may be found his
ally and confederate. It was a strange
fatality which impelled this animal to
abandon communal life and the companionship
of his kind for the restraints,
the safety, the infinite weariness of domesticity.
It was an amazing tractableness
which caused him to accept a
set of principles foreign to his nature—the
integrity of work, the honourableness
of servitude, the artificial values
of civilization.

As a consequence of this extraordinary
change of base, we have grown accustomed
to judge the dog by human
standards. In fact, there are no other
standards which apply to him. The
good dog, like the good man, is the dog
[Pg 320]

which has duties to perform, and which
performs them faithfully. The bad dog,
like the bad man, is the dog which is
idle, ill-tempered and over-indulged
by women. Women are responsible for
most of the dog-failures, as well as for
many of the man-failures of the world.
So long as they content themselves with
toy beasts, this does not much matter;
but a real dog, beloved and therefore
pampered by his mistress, is a lamentable
spectacle. He suffers from fatty
degeneration of his moral being.

What if the shepherd dog fares
hardly, and if exposure stiffens his
limbs! He has at least lived, and played
his part in life. Nothing more beautiful
or more poignant has ever been
written about any animal than James
Hogg’s description of his old collie
which could no longer gather in the
sheep, and with which he was compelled
to part, because—poor Ettrick
shepherd—he could not afford to pay
[Pg 321]

the tax on two dogs. The decrepit beast
refused to be separated from the flocks
which had been his care and pride. Day
after day he hobbled along, watching
the new collie bustling about his work,
and—too wise to interfere—looking
with reproachful eyes at the master
who had so reluctantly discarded him.

The literature of the dog is limitless.
A single shelf would hold all that has
been written about the cat. A library
would hardly suffice for the prose and
verse dedicated to the dog. From
“Gêlert” to “Rab” and “Bob, Son of
Battle,” he has dominated ballad and
fiction. Few are the poets and few the
men of letters who have not paid some
measure of tribute to him. Goethe, indeed,
and Alfred de Musset detested all
dogs, and said so composedly. Their
detestation was temperamental, and
not the result of an unfortunate encounter,
such as hardened the heart
of Dr. Isaac Barrow, mathematician,
[Pg 322]

and Master of Trinity College. Sidney
Smith tells us with something akin to
glee that this eminent scholar, when
taking an early stroll in the grounds of
a friend and host, was attacked by a
huge and unwarrantably suspicious
mastiff. Barrow, a fighter all his life (a
man who would fight Algerine pirates
was not to be easily daunted), hurled
the dog to the ground, and fell on top
of him. The mastiff could not get up,
but neither could Barrow, who called
loudly for assistance. It came, and the
combatants were separated; but a distaste
for morning strolls and an aversion
for dogs lingered in the Master’s
mind. There was one less enthusiast
in the world.

We are apt to think that the exuberance
of sentiment entertained by Americans
for dogs is a distinctively British
trait, that we have inherited it along
with our language, our literature, our
manliness, our love of sport, our admirable
[Pg 323]

outdoor qualities. But it may
be found blooming luxuriously in other
and less favoured lands. That interesting
study of Danish childhood by
Carl Ewald, called “My Little Boy,”
contains a chapter devoted to the
lamentable death of a dog named Jean,
“the biggest dog in Denmark.” This
animal, though at times condescending
to kindness, knew how to maintain his
just authority. “He once bit a boy so
hard that the boy still walks lame. He
once bit his own master.” The simple
pride with which these incidents are
narrated would charm a dog-lover’s
soul. And the lame boy’s point of view
is not permitted to intrude.

Of all writers who have sung the
praises of the dog, and who have justified
our love for him, Maeterlinck has
given the fullest expression to the profound
and absorbing egotism which
underlies this love. Never for a moment
does he consider his dog save as a worshipper.
[Pg 324]

Never does he think of himself
save as a being worshipped. Never
does he feel that this relationship can
be otherwise than just, reasonable, and
satisfying to both parties. “The dog,”
he says, “reveres us as though we had
drawn him out of nothing. He has a
morality which surpasses all that he is
able to discover in himself, and which
he can practise without scruple and
without fear. He possesses truth in its
fullness. He has a certain and infinite
ideal.”

And what is this ideal? “He” (the
dog) “is the only living being that has
found, and recognizes, an indubitable,
unexceptionable and definite god.”

And who is this god? M. Maeterlinck,
you, I, anybody who has bought
and reared a puppy. Yet we are told
that the dog is intelligent. What is
there about men which can warrant the
worship of a wise beast? What sort of
“truth in its fullness” is compatible
[Pg 325]

with such a blunder? Yet it is for the
sake of being idolized that we prize and
cherish the idolater. Our fellow mortals
will not love us unless we are lovable.
They will not admire us unless we are
admirable. Our cats will probably
neither love nor admire us, being self-engrossed
animals, free from encumbering
sensibilities. But our dogs will love
and admire the meanest of us, and feed
our colossal vanity with their uncritical
homage. M. Maeterlinck recognizes our
dependence on the dog for the deification
we crave, and is unreasonably
angry with the cat for her aloofness.
In her eyes, he complains, we are parasites
in our own homes. “She curses
us from the depths of her mysterious
heart.”

She does not. She tolerates us with a
wise tolerance, recognizing our usefulness,
and indulgent of our foibles.
Domesticity has not cost her the heavy
price it has cost the dog. She has
[Pg 326]

merely exchanged the asylum of cave
or tree for the superior accommodation
of the house. Her habits remain unaltered,
her freedom unviolated. Cream-fed
and pampered, she still loves the
pleasures of the chase; nor will she pick
and choose her prey at the recommendation
of prejudiced humanity. M.
Maeterlinck, who has striven to enter
into the consciousness of the dog, describes
it as congested with duties and
inhibitions. There are chairs he must
not sit on, rooms he must not enter,
food he must not steal, babies he must
not upset, cats he must not chase,
visitors he must not bark at, beggars
and tramps he must not permit to
enter the gates. He lives under as
many, and as strict, compulsions as
though he were a citizen of the United
States. By comparison with this perverted
intelligence, this artificial morality,
the mind of the cat appears like a
cool and spacious chamber, with only
[Pg 327]

her own spirit to fill it, and only her
own tastes and distastes to be consulted
and obeyed.

Perhaps it is because the dog is so
hedged in by rules and regulations that
he has lost his initiative. Descended
from animals that lived in packs, and
that enjoyed the advantages of communal
intelligence, he could never have
possessed this quality as it was possessed
by an animal that lived alone,
and had only his own acuteness and experience
to rely on. But having surrendered
his will to the will of man, and
his conscience to the keeping of man,
the dog has by now grown dependent
for his simplest pleasures upon man’s
caprice. He loves to roam; but whereas
the cat does roam at will, rightly rejecting
all interference with her liberty,
the dog craves permission to accompany
his master on a stroll, and, being refused,
slinks sadly back to confinement
and inaction. I have great respect for
[Pg 328]

those exceptional dogs that take their
exercise when they need or desire it in
self-sufficing solitude. I once knew an
Irish terrier that had this independent
turn of mind. He invited himself to
daily constitutionals, and might have
been seen any morning trotting along
the road, miles away from home, with
the air of an animal walking to keep his
flesh down. In the end he was run over
by a speeding motor, but what of that?
Die we must, and, while he lived, he was
free.

A lordliness of sentiment mars much
of the admirable poetry written about
dogs. The poet thrones himself before
addressing his devoted and credulous
ally. Even Matthew Arnold’s lines to
“Kaiser Dead”—among the best of
their kind—are heavy with patronage:

“But all those virtues which commend

The humbler sort who serve and tend,

Were thine in store, thou faithful friend.”

To be sure, Kaiser was a mongrel; but
[Pg 329]

why emphasize his low estate? As a
matter of fact, mongrels, like self-made
men, are apt to have a peculiar complacency
of demeanour. They do not
rank themselves among “the humbler
sort”; but “serve and tend” on the
same conditions as their betters.

Two years ago Mr. Galsworthy, who
stands in the foremost rank of dog-lovers,
and who has drawn for us some
of the most lifelike and attractive dogs
in fiction, pleaded strongly and emotionally
for the exemption of this animal
from any form of experimental research.
He had the popular sentiment
of England back of him, because popular
sentiment always
is
emotional. The
question of vivisection is one of abstract
morality. None but the supremely ignorant
can deny its usefulness. There
remain certain questions which call for
clean-cut answers. Does our absolute
power over beasts carry with it an
absolute right? May we justifiably
[Pg 330]

sacrifice them for the good of humanity?
What degree of pain are we morally
justified in inflicting on them to
save men from disease and death? If
we faced the issue squarely, we should
feel no more concern for the kind of
animal which is used for experimentation
than for the kind of human being
who may possibly benefit by the experiment.
Right and wrong admit of no
sentimental distinctions. Yet the vivisectionist
pleads, “Is not the life of a
young mother worth more than the life
of a beast?” The anti-vivisectionist
asks: “How can man deliberately torture
the creature that loves and trusts
him?” And Mr. Galsworthy admitted
that he had nothing to say about vivisection
in general. Cats and rabbits
might take their chances. He asked
only that the dog should be spared.

It has been hinted more than once
that if we develop the dog’s intelligence
too far, we may end by robbing him of
[Pg 331]

his illusions. He has absorbed so many
human characteristics—vanity, sociability,
snobbishness, a sense of humour
and a conscience—that there is danger
of his also acquiring the critical faculty.
He will not then content himself with
flying at the throats of villains—the
out-and-out villain is rare in the common
walks of life—he will doubt the
godlike qualities of his master. The
warmth of his affection will chill, its
steadfastness will be subject to decay.

Of this regrettable possibility there is
as yet no sign. The hound, Argus,
beating the ground with his feeble tail
in an expiring effort to welcome the
disguised Odysseus, is a prototype of
his successor to-day. Scattered here and
there in the pages of history are instances
of unfaithfulness; but their
rarity gives point to their picturesqueness.
Froissart tells us that the greyhound,
Math, deserted his master,
King Richard the Second, to fawn on
[Pg 332]

the Duke of Lancaster who was to depose
and succeed him; and that a
greyhound belonging to Charles of
Blois fled on the eve of battle to the
camp of John de Montfort, seeking
protection from the stronger man.
These anecdotes indicate a grasp of
political situations which is no part of
the dog’s ordinary make-up. Who can
imagine the fortunate, faithful little
spaniel that attended Mary Stuart in
her last sad months, and in her last
heroic hours, fawning upon Queen
Elizabeth? Who can imagine Sir Walter
Scott’s dogs slinking away from
him when the rabble of Jedburgh
heaped insults on his bowed grey head?

The most beautiful words ever written
about a dog have no reference to
his affectionate qualities. Simonides,
celebrating the memory of a Thessalian
hound, knows only that he was
fleet and brave. “Surely, even as thou
liest in this tomb, I deem the wild
[Pg 333]

beasts yet fear thy white bones, Lycas;
and thy valour great Pelion knows, and
the lonely peaks of Cithæron.” This is
heroic praise, and so, in a fashion, is
Byron’s epitaph on Boatswain. But
Byron, being of the moderns, can find
no better way of honouring dogs than
by defaming men; a stupidity, pardonable
in the poet only because he was
the most sincere lover of animals the
world has ever known. His tastes were
catholic, his outlook was whimsical.
He was not in the least discomposed
when his forgetful wolf-hound bit him,
or when his bulldog bit him without
the excuse of forgetfulness. Moore
tells us that the first thing he saw on
entering Byron’s palace in Venice was
a notice, “Keep clear of the dog!” and
the first thing he heard was the voice
of his host calling out anxiously, “Take
care, or that monkey will fly at
you.”

It is a pleasant relief, after floundering
[Pg 334]

through seas of sentiment, to read
about dogs that were every whit as
imperfect as their masters; about Cowper’s
“Beau” who has been immortalized
for his disobedience; or Sir Isaac
Newton’s “Diamond” who has been
immortalized for the mischief he
wrought; or Prince Rupert’s “Boy”
who was shot while loyally pulling
down a rebel on Marston Moor; or the
Church of England spaniel, mentioned
by Addison, who proved his allegiance
to the Establishment by worrying a
dissenter. It is also a pleasure of a
different sort to read about the wise
little dog who ran away from Mrs.
Welsh (Carlyle’s mother-in-law) on the
streets of Edinburgh, to follow Sir
Walter Scott; and about the London
dog of sound literary tastes who tried
for many nights to hear Dickens read.
It is always possible that if men would
exact a less unalterable devotion from
their dogs, they might find these animals
[Pg 335]

to be possessed of individual and
companionable traits.

But not of human sagacity. It is
their privilege to remain beasts, bound
by admirable limitations, thrice happy
in the things they do not have to know,
and feel, and be. “The Spectator” in a
hospitable mood once invited its readers
to send it anecdotes of their dogs.
The invitation was, as might be imagined,
cordially and widely accepted.
Mr. Strachey subsequently published
a collection of these stories in a volume
which had all the vraisemblance of
Hans Andersen and “The Arabian
Nights.” Reading it, one could but
wonder and regret that the tribe of
man had risen to unmerited supremacy.
The “Spectator” dogs could have run
the world, the war and the Versailles
Conference without our lumbering interference.

THE END

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER DISPUTE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at
www.gutenberg.org
. If you
are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit
www.gutenberg.org/donate
.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility:
www.gutenberg.org
.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.