The Project Gutenberg eBook of The film: by M. Jackson Wrigley

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at
www.gutenberg.org
. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title:
The film:

Subtitle:
Its use in popular education

Author:
M. Jackson Wrigley

Contributor:
Gilbert Parker

Contributor:
Walter A. Briscoe

Release Date:
September 28, 2023 [eBook #71747]

Language:
English

Credits:
Charlene Taylor, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FILM: ***

THE FILM:

ITS USE IN POPULAR EDUCATION

THE FILM:

ITS USE IN POPULAR EDUCATION

BY

M. JACKSON WRIGLEY, F.L.A.

CHIEF LIBRARIAN, THE LIVERPOOL LIBRARY, LYCEUM, LIVERPOOL

WITH A FOREWORD BY

RT. HON. SIR GILBERT PARKER, BART.

AND

AN INTRODUCTION BY

WALTER A. BRISCOE, F.L.A.

CITY LIBRARIAN OF NOTTINGHAM

AUTHOR OF “LIBRARY ADVERTISING,” ETC.

GRAFTON & CO.

COPTIC HOUSE, LONDON, W.C.

THE H. W. WILSON CO.

NEW YORK

1922

To the

Memory of two Dear Colleagues

THOMAS RILEY

(
late
)
of the Birmingham Public Libraries

AND

ERIC A. PEPPIETTE

(
late
)
of the Liverpool University Library

Who died for their Country

“
Somewhere in France
”

[5]

FOREWORD

I have
read Mr. Jackson Wrigley’s little book
and I think it an admirable statement of the
uses of the Film in Popular Education. It is
clearly and succinctly written and its arguments
are undeniable. I have just come from
California where I spent nearly a year in
writing films and studying the industry and
art, and Mr. Wrigley is right in saying that
6,000 schools in America have cinema rooms.
Quite apart from the entertainment in stories
presented on the screen, there is immense
value in the teaching of the film in geography,
science, and natural history and topical events;
and I would, if I could, put a film in every
school, or rather, have films shown in every
school in the land. I believe some fears have
been expressed that the films may injure the
eye-sight. Well, there is steady improvement
in the lighting of the films, and expert medical
authorities must decide as to that. Of one thing
[6]

I am sure, that if injury does ensue it will
be dealt with by scientific experts, and the
danger will ultimately be removed.

Mr. Wrigley’s book is an excellent contribution
to general knowledge on the subject,
and it should be widely read. The time
will come, I believe, when Municipalities in
England will do as is done in Wellesley,
Massachusetts, and give “Municipal Movies”
two days a week. I have faith that the
enquiries and reports of the Cinema Commission
will induce the London County Council
to include the film in the educational life of the
country, and that all Councils throughout the
country will do the same.

Gilbert Parker.

[7]

AUTHOR’S PREFACE

Some
of the matter contained in the following
pages has been included in papers and lectures,
and after frequent requests from various
sources, I have decided to submit the whole
in book form.

The topics touch upon the various phases
of the value and utility of the “film” as an
indispensable ally of the education and
library authorities, capable of being used
in the interests of both.

Other subjects of vital interest have been
included, all coming within the scope of the
projector. The film as an educational agency
is now recognized, and the following chapters
will be read, it is hoped, with interest.

M. J. W.

[8]

[9]

INTRODUCTION

The Cinema-Educator.

The educational possibilities of the film
have not yet been fully visualized, and this
volume is designed to advance its usefulness
in the widest sense in the scheme of education.

“Do not train boys to learning by force
and harshness, but direct them to it by what
amuses their minds,” said Plato, and this in a
measure is the theme of a section of this book
dealing specifically with the use of the cinematograph
in our schools and colleges. One
can imagine the introduction of the film in
class-work eliminating that Shakespearean type
of scholar who goeth “like snail, unwillingly
to school.”

Emerson wrote to the effect that “the
secret of education lies in respecting the
pupil.” Although he was not making allusion
to the pupil of the eye, it may be that to-day
“the secret of education lies in
attracting
the
[10]

pupil,” and the film is the important factor
to secure his or her attention.

At a scholastic conference on “New Ideals
in Education,” at Bedford College, Miss E.
Holmes affirmed that the average teacher of
to-day could think of no other way of teaching
than by grouping pupils into classes and
educating them by chalk and talk. That
meant that the older children had to mark
time during the most critical years of their
life, making them tired of routine, and all
desire to continue education died of sheer
inanition. The average teacher into whose
soul had entered the iron evil of tradition
could rid himself of much routine, to the
advantage of himself and his pupils. Given a
sympathetic Government and a sympathetic
local authority, teachers might do much as
they pleased in the way of striking out new
paths for themselves, it is averred. The aid
of the film may be one of the “new paths” to
knowledge.

It has been said elsewhere that when you
introduce into our schools a spirit of emulation,
you have present the keenest spur admissible
[11]

to the youthful intellect. The screen
can convey the proper spirit to the boy and
girl, whether the subject be scientific, literary,
historical, or biographical. Rousseau wrote
that “Education is either from nature, from
man, or from things”—and the film is the
modern medium. If it be truly said that the
eye is the window of the soul then the possibilities
of the cinematograph in our schools are
without limit.

While the film can never supersede oral
education, it may be most valuable as an aid
to instruction. Modern educationists would
not contemplate the idea of training the eye
to the exclusion of the use of the ear. The
cinematograph may (to use a stereotyped
phrase) “supply a long-felt want.”

The children of to-day are such habitual
Cinema-goers that too much cinematograph
is to be discouraged, but the film used in
proper perspective in the schools will excite
and increase interest in science, industry, art,
geography, travel, history, biography and
literature.

“The eye sees what it brings the power
[12]

to see,” said Carlyle, and the inference is
obvious.

A student of child psychology (blessed
word) opines that a child criminal is often
the outcome of the cinema—forgetting, probably,
that child-criminals existed long before
the “movies” were even thought of, and
overlooking the fact that “penny dreadfuls”
used to be credited or discredited with this
in the days gone by.

Nevertheless, the film as a new force must
be recognized. At a recent Congress on Child
Welfare, held in Brussels, the importance and
value of the moving picture was referred to as
frequently as its dangers; and it was agreed
that the problem was not how to nullify, but
how to harness this new power.

For the sake of the children it was proposed
that a form of moral control of films should
be set up. The control, it was suggested,
should be exercised by a central and special
commission composed of persons nominated
by the Government and chosen from members
of elected bodies, from associations of artists
and literary people, from societies for the
[13]

protection of childhood, and also from firms
having an interest in the film business, producers
and importers of films. Special exhibitions
for children were advocated. This
important phase is treated upon at some length
in this volume.

The film has, however, a wider sphere than
in the confines of the juvenile—that of the
adolescent and the adult, summed up in the
one term of “the Public.”

“Public instruction should be the first
object of Government,” declared Napoleon
(although Buonaparte never foresaw that he
would be so ignominiously filmed in divers
manners for the “instruction” of posterity).
It is incredible, however, how much instruction
the Public receives from the cinemas. It is,
therefore, an enormous power for good or for
evil.

It is well to review the position in this volume
and not to shirk the issue.

All manner of indictments have been levelled
against the cinemas. Writers have vied with
each other in their condemnation. “The
producers have prostituted a noble, useful,
[14]

and marvellous art before the money god
of the films,” it has been publicly asserted.

Much is being done to “ban” improper
films, and it would be better for the reputation
of the film-world if these immoral photo-plays
were “taxed” out of existence. Such
films are not “towards the education of your
daughters,” as Shakespeare writes. The Public
can be its own Censor. In the meantime
educationists and social-reformers can strive
to guide public opinion.

“I have hope that society may be reformed,
when I see how much education may
be reformed,” said a German writer once;
and the reform of the film will come about
possibly only by the people educating the
film-producers to the view that it requires
something else than the “adults only” brand.

While this volume advocates “direct
action” against this class of film it is not
intended unduly to emphasize the seamy side
of the case. It is recognized to the full that
there are many splendid films being “released”
daily, and many managers are rendering
a public service by “featuring” only the
[15]

best class of picture. These many admirable
productions are to be commended, and it is
for the public to encourage the producers by
patronizing those houses where refinement is
the rule, to the exclusion of the other brand.
Cinemas are public educators.

Mr. Arthur Weigall, author of “The Influence
of the Kinematograph on National
Life,” has at various times lamented on the
dullness of screen plays, making Byron’s
phrase in “Lara”—“dull the film”—almost a
modern one. There are some film-producers
who still fail to understand the mentality of
a large portion of their patrons. Some films
do not appeal to the intelligence of the
audience. Many patrons are wearied of seeing
what passes for melodrama. It would be a
happy release if there were fewer “releases”
of this nature. It has been said that until
producers recognize that the principles of
Art must come before commercial considerations
the film industry is doomed.

It is for the people to insist on the best, and
only the best, being “screened,” and the
various “corporations” that are giving us
[16]

mediocre matter will be crowded out by the
far-seeing producers who realize that the
Public, unlike the Law, is not “a ass.”

While the film can never supplant the
printed word, it has been the means of directing
the attention of many people to the books
available at the Public Libraries. Quite
recently the Rev. T. W. Pym, in an article
in the “Library Association Record,” said:
“People will read any book which they have
seen on the films, whether it be Dickens or
‘George Eliot’ or any other author, whom,
normally, that particular person would not
think of attempting to read.” The cinema is
thus a direct advertising medium for the
Public Libraries. This phase, and the use
of the cinema as a publicity service for Public
Libraries, has been definitely outlined in the
book on “Library Advertising,” and Mr.
Wrigley considerably amplifies this in the
following pages.

This volume is a résumé of what has been
done in film-land, and the author advances
numerous original ideas that will be read with
interest and profit by educationists generally,
[17]

library authorities, social-reformers, and
cinema-goers collectively. It is not a technical
work, but the technics of the art of film
production are also dealt with. After studying
this volume the reader will doubtless accept
Mr. Wrigley’s contention that “the film is the
coming apostle of education.”

Walter A. Briscoe.

[18]

[19]

CONTENTS

PAGE

Introduction
: The Cinema-Educator
9

I.

Historical
21

The genesis of the film.—Present and future.

II.

Educational
26

The cinematograph in the schools.—The film
as teacher.—Some educational films.—History
taught by film.—The development
of the British Colonies.—Political propaganda.—The
film in American schools.—Instructing
the deaf mute.—In mental
hospitals.—Medical students.

III.

Libraries and Literature
50

School, Library and cinema.—Film collections.—Preservation
of the film.—Library
of films in Berlin.—Advertising the public
library.—“Publicity” films.—The book.—Film
as mental ally.—Filmed literature.

IV.

Social
76

The Cinema Commission.—Film censorship.—Juvenile
crime.—Morality tests.—The
“White Scourge” problem.—Churches
and the cinema.—The film and the savage.—Co-operative
cinemas.

V.

Commercial Advertising
96
[20]

Advertising by the film.—Sales by the film.

VI.

Production
101

The failure and success of the film.—Cinema
eccentricities: blunders and inaccuracies.—Natural
colour films.—Talking films.—Paper
films.

VII.

Conclusion
121

[21]

THE FILM

I

HISTORICAL

The
rise and development of the cinematograph
during the last few years has been truly
phenomenal.

Genesis of the Film.

The history of the cinematograph dates
back to the obscure ages of the year 65
B.C.
,
at which period Lucretius, in his “De Rerum
Natura,” made certain pertinent remarks
relative to the persistence of vision—the base
upon which the whole theory of motion
photography is built. According to a document
in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, the
cinematograph has a history as far back as

A.D.
130.

The first stage from which the cinematograph
evolved was an invention, simplicity itself,
[22]

which readily lent itself to immediate and
successful development. It emanated as a
toy for children, and this has been gradually
built up, stage by stage, until finally completed
as at the present time. I refer to that
simple toy-wheel or “cycle of life;” also to
the children’s booklet consisting of a series of
pictures of various stages of action. The
leaves were held between the first finger and
thumb, the little book bent backwards, and
the leaves released, one by one, as quickly as
possible. The whole gave the impression of
the subject being in motion; and this optical
illusion was the embryo of the modern motion
picture.

Before the introduction of the celluloid film,
animated pictures from glass plates were
exhibited; but without the pliable celluloid
film it is contended that cinematography
would have been impracticable.

Development.

The modern cinematograph was rendered
possible by the invention in 1890 of the
celluloid roll film, on which serial pictures are
[23]

impressed by instantaneous photography; a
long sensitised film being moved across the
focal plane of a camera and exposed intermittently.
For an hour’s exhibition 50,000
to 165,000 pictures are needed. To regulate
the feed in the lantern a hole is punched in the
film for each picture. These holes are extremely
accurate in position, and when they
wear, the feed becomes irregular, and the
picture “dances” in an unpleasant manner—hence
that irritating feeling which arises from
seeing a well-worn film vibrating. The
machines have been devised in enormous
numbers under the names of bioscope, biograph,
kinetscope, mutograph and cinematograph,
derived chiefly from Greek and Latin
words for life, movement, change, etc.

The first actual attempt recorded seems to
be that of a Frenchman named Louis Du
Hauron, who took out two patents in 1864.
Although they covered all the essential points
of the modern cinematograph, the one factor
which made it a failure was the slowness of the
wet collodion plates of that time as compared
with the gelatino-bromide. In 1906, Mr. C.
[24]

Rider Noble brought out a patent whereby
the moving film could be stopped at any
moment for examination. Prior to this invention,
the film had to speed on to the end
without interruption.

New ideas and inventions seem to add
improvement daily.

Present and Future.

It was predicted that the cinematograph,
like the skating rink, would have a short life
and die in its infancy, but this was a mistaken
idea—the “movies,” like “Liza,” have “come
to stay.” They are a force to be reckoned
with. It would not be overstating the fact
to say that more people attend the cinema
than all other places of entertainment massed
together.

The returns relative to the cinema industry
are immense. Regarding attendances at these
places in this country, it shows no fewer than
1,075,875,000 attendances at cinema exhibitions
in the course of a single year. In the
British Isles there are approximately 4,500
theatres with a seating capacity of accommodating
[25]

one in every thirty-seven of the
population. Upon working out these figures
it shows that the entire population of the
United Kingdom visits cinema exhibitions
on an average once a fortnight. About 5,000
new subjects are issued each year, and some
70,000,000 feet of film are running through the
projectors each week. From 80,000 to 100,000
persons are directly engaged in the various
branches of the trade.

Its increased popularity in the future is
assured, and its progress will depend largely
upon what uses the nation makes of this new
force in national education.

[26]

II

EDUCATIONAL

The Cinematograph in Schools.

Various boroughs have made forward steps
in the introduction of the cinematograph in
the school. The Birmingham Juvenile Organization
Committee has prepared an exceedingly
readable and interesting report for presentation
to the Birmingham Education Committee.
To expand upon this theory, an open exhibition
is to be arranged and will be attended by
thousands of children from the senior departments
of the schools, the younger element
being excluded. Teachers and officials of the
Local Education Authority will lend their
support.

A synopsis of prepared notes was given to
the teachers and scholars. The schools are
to be formed into groups, so that pupils may
attend a special performance at a convenient
centre at regular intervals. The programme of
[27]

exhibition is to last for one hour; the films
selected coming under five headings:—

(1) Literature,

(2) Geography,

(3) Science,

(4) Natural History,

(5) Composition.

Literature is represented by a pictorial
representation of “The Merchant of Venice.”
It is argued that by this method the children
will be induced to turn to the plays after they
have seen the characters portrayed upon the
screen.

One feature missing is that the film cannot
give the child any idea of the beauty of Shakespeare’s
prose and verse. In the case of
geography it is apparent that the film can
efficiently take the place of the text-book.
Science and natural history could be represented
by films showing the life-history of the
salmon and the silkworm. One suggested
experiment dealing with composition is that
a portion of the story be shown, and that
when the children have returned to the school
they should be asked to invent a title or to
[28]

summarize the film as far as it has been shown,
and complete it according to their own ideas.
At a future sitting the remaining portion of
the film would be exhibited and the children
would then compare it with their own efforts.

A similar exhibition was given in Manchester
before members of the Stretford Education
Committee. In this instance a portable
projector was used, the lighting circuit being
tapped for electric power. It is openly admitted
that the cinematograph has a wide
field, but the idea that the cinema will ever
supplant the text-book is considered unlikely.

One would like to know the definite view
adopted by the Commissioners as regards
educational films and the benefits derived
therefrom. Many authorities are still stumbling
along in the dark, unwilling to make a
beginning, but they cannot maintain this
attitude for long, because the forward march
of the utility of the cinema in the school is
becoming apparent, and all education authorities
who are apostles of progress will
have to toe the line.

[29]

The Film as Teacher.

When it is remembered that the moving
picture camera may be used in connection
with the microscope, that it has an unlimited
field in geography, in the recording of social
life, and in natural history—it seems difficult
to account for the fact that universities and
colleges have passed it by. The value is not
so much to be sought in the classroom, for
there are, of course, objections to its use there,
but the founding of this new type of library
would possess an interest for future generations
which can scarcely be over-estimated.

There is no doubt that the decision of the
London County Council upon the question
of using the film as a part of the educational
curriculum, will, in the main, be governed by
the nature of the Report issued by the Special
Committee appointed by the National Council
of Public Morals to consider the part the
cinematograph is destined to play in public
education.

The Education Committee was instructed
to report as to the provision by the Council
[30]

of the facilities on an educational basis to
enable all London school children to see
cinematograph films. These were placed under
the following heads:—

(
a
) Purely instructional or educational;
travel, science, and natural history.

(
b
) Suitable in other respects for exhibition
to a juvenile audience.

Certain objections were raised. One fundamental
difficulty was eyestrain, and another,
ill-ventilated rooms. The whole problem is
being viewed by experts from a technical,
psychological, and physiological standpoint.

They had exhibited before them a film
showing the power to teach history and
geography. This was demonstrated in a remarkable
way by an exhibition film relating
to Christopher Columbus. The scenario was
in Spain, for the most part in the actual surroundings
associated with Columbus. There
could be no better way of demonstrating to
the scholar the trials and difficulties encountered
by Columbus before and after he
realized his life’s ambition.

[31]
It was contended that it would be better
to arrange a series of lectures beforehand,
explaining at some length the persecution
endured by Columbus. By this means an
oral and visional teaching would be enacted,
leaving a more lasting impression than would
be attainable otherwise.

Some Educational Films.

To-day Shakespeare is reeled off a spool,
and human life taught at the end of a crank.
You may travel over land and sea without
leaving your seat and see great personages
of the world perform their mighty deeds, and
unconsciously knowledge of life and the world
is derived which makes a difference in the
conception of things surrounding us.

The average member of a community fails
to comprehend the significance of the new
and powerful agency in education. All this
means a revolution in pedagogy, the scrapping
of text-books in favour of the film. It means
a vividness where before had been vagueness.
It means a true visualization and realization
of life, where hitherto an indefinite printed
[32]

description of it was acquired. In this country
gatherings of teachers have been vividly
impressed by animated photography. By
means of the silent teacher, young and old
have learned more about the physical, industrial
and social geography of the world
during the past few years than during any
previous quarter of a century. It brings
vividly before our eyes the idea of intense
cold, atmospheric conditions, blizzards, and
life peculiar to the regions around the Poles;
and, again, the sweltering heat, vegetation,
methods of living and transport in the tropics.
One is brought face to face with the primitive
life, habits, and customs of the aborigines
of the least known corners of the world;
while even life immediately around us is
revealed in a manner which hitherto has been
impossible.

Take a film about the volcano, of which
most children have heard but never seen.
It would explain that a volcano throws up
smoke, calcined dust, red-hot stones, and
melted matter called lava. The summit is
hollowed out in a great excavation having
[33]

the shape of a funnel, sometimes miles in
circumference. The principal volcanoes could
be shown, as Vesuvius, near Naples; Etna,
in Sicily; Hecla, in Iceland.

A curtain of smoke filling the orifice of the
crater denotes the forthcoming eruption. When
the air is calm the smoke rises vertically
to nearly a mile in height, finally spreading
out like a huge blanket, cutting off the rays
of the sun, and sinking down on the volcano,
covering it with a dense smoke-cloud. A
huge sheaf of fire bursts from the crater to
a height of 6,000 ft., and the heavy cloud is
illuminated by the fiery red of the sky. Millions
of sparks dart out like vivid lightning to the
summit of the blazing sheaf. These sparks,
so small from a distance, are, in reality,
incandescent masses of stone, and of a sufficient
momentum to crush the most solid structure
in their fall.

From the bowels of the mountain through
the volcanic chimney ascends a flux of melted
mineral substance, or lava, pouring out into
the crater, forming a lake of dazzling fire in
the sun. Through the crevasses as well as
[34]

over the edges of the crater the lava flows
in streams. The fiery current, formed of
dazzling and paste-like matter, similar to
melted metal, advances slowly; the front
of the lava stream represents a rampart on
fire. Animals and human beings flee before
it, but all objects stationary are lost. Trees
are seen to blaze a moment on contact with
the lava and sink down reduced to charcoal;
the thickest walls impeding its progress are
calcined and collapse; the hardest rocks are
vitrified, melted. The flow of lava eventually
subsides; the subterranean vapours, forced
by the enormous pressure of the solid mass,
escape with greater violence than ever, carrying
with them whirlwinds of fine dust floating
in sinister clouds and sinking down upon the
neighbouring plain. Finally the mountain
ceases its activity and peace reigns again for
an indefinite time.

Visualize the terrible eruption of Mt. Etna
in Sicily of two hundred years ago. A dark
night preceded the storm. Trees swayed like
reeds buffeted by the wind; people fled
to avoid being crushed under the ruins of
[35]

their dwellings. They lost their footing on
the quaking ground and fell. Mt. Etna
burst into a fissure ten miles long, and along
this fissure broke forth a number of volcanic
mouths, vomiting clouds of black smoke and
calcined sand. Soon seven of these mouths
were united in one abyss emitting cinders and
lava.

Torrents of lava poured from all the crevasses
of the mountain down upon the plain,
destroying houses, forests and crops. The
stream reached the walls of Catania and spread
over the country. There, as if to demonstrate
its strength to the terrified Catanians, it
tore away a hill and transplanted it some
distance; it lifted in one mass a field planted
with vines and let it float for some time, until
the green was reduced to charcoal and disappeared.

A fierce battle ensued between lava and
water. The lava presented a perpendicular
front nearly a mile in length and forty feet
high. At the touch of that burning wall,
which continued plunging further and further
into the waves, enormous masses of vapour
[36]

rose with terrible hissings, darkened the sky
with their thick clouds, and fell in a salt
rain over the region. In a few days the lava
had made the limits of the shore recede three
hundred and fifty yards.

The stream, swollen with new tributaries,
grew from day to day and approached the
town. The inhabitants could be seen from
the top of the walls watching the implacable
scourge. The lava finally reached the ramparts.
The fiery flood rose slowly but it
rose ceaselessly. It finally touched the top
of the walls, whereupon, yielding to pressure,
they were overthrown for the length of forty-five
yards, and the stream of fire penetrated
the town.

The last scene was that of the inhabitants
fleeing in terror. What a realistic geography
lesson, never to be forgotten, would a film
of this description make!

The films can show anything from the mining
of coal to the manufacture of the needle;
from the weaving of a dainty handkerchief
to the building of a battleship. The films
projected would be purely educational, though
[37]

there are numerous incidents shown, which
amuse and entertain, in addition to imparting
information. A particular film series of an
educational and scientific nature is now available.

The Smith-Urban “Kinemacolour” series
depicting the budding flowers and the opening
of blossoms—which in nature occupies several
days—are disclosed with uncanny realism in
less than two minutes.

Marvels of the universe, a scientific film
of nature-study and general knowledge, finds
many patrons.

History Taught by Film.

It would be necessary for historians to
collaborate very closely with the producers
in the preparation of historical films. The
mere fact of being called upon to provide a
scene for a picture and a detailed explanation,
however, would go far to arouse a new enthusiasm
in their work among students and teachers
of history. It might assist us to vision our
forefathers out of their portrait frames and
parish churches, which are, perhaps, their
[38]

only extant monuments, and reveal them to
us as they lived and moved.

In most cases the educative value was confined
to actual performers, or those who took
part in the preparation of costumes, and in
general the action of a scene was too far
removed from the audience for close observation
and too quickly over for effective study.

Supposing one could produce a film, actually
showing the scenes enacted during the life
and times of the Romans; depicting their
daily life, court ceremonial and ancient coronations,
or their judicial proceedings, their
tournaments,—we should add materially to
our historical knowledge of the people; and
one must not lose sight of the fact, that when
we have passed to the “Great Beyond,” and
the world still continues to be inhabited
some thousands of years hence, populated
with people actuated with the same ideas, the
same aspirations as ourselves, our present
period will stand exactly in a similar relationship,—in
regard to time at least.

What could present a more magnificent
visual panorama than the procession of events
[39]

of the Elizabethan period to the eighteenth
century, laying open to our view their lives,
the arts and crafts of their time, and our
progress is then made over the stepping-stones
of the past? Imagine the royal events of
history, the gorgeous scenes of the coronations
of English kings, as they succeeded each other.

Supposing an authoritative film could have
been produced of the Great War, showing the
whole of Europe in conflict, from the invasion
of Belgium to the Armistice. The whole of
the incidents—the devastation of property
by the mighty engines of war; refugees in
flight from the oncoming enemy; the heroic
attacks and defence by the British soldiers in
spite of tremendous odds; the want, misery
and suffering following in the train.

The scope of the cinematograph for educational
purposes could be considerably widened
by children and adults being shown how
things have been and are being done. The
use of colour films for explaining history
would enable the teacher to demonstrate the
growth of British Dominion in India—for
instance, Bombay could be represented by a
[40]

tiny red speck, which would expand in correct
historical sequence until the whole of the
peninsula was covered. The development of
the colouring, as this or that successful campaign
was completed, would explain to observers,
more explicitly than any printed
list, the political effects of history. The
scenes would thus be indelibly impressed upon
the minds of children. And the same idea
might be extended to the other colonies,
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa,
etc., depicting their history from the first
settlement to the complete establishment of
the Overseas dominions and their activities
of to-day. The film, in short, is a fine medium
for political propaganda if wisely used.

The following subjects lend themselves to
effective treatment as film productions for
educational purposes: the growth of the
European Colonies, the rise and fall of the
Ottoman Empire, the decline and renaissance
of Poland, the historical groupings of the
various States of Europe in the wars of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, to name
but a few.

[41]

The Film in American Schools.

The use of films in American schools is
already an accomplished fact and is generally
recognised as a great educational asset.

The American Red Cross during the War
found it extremely useful in aiding its work,
and it was decided, in view of the coming of
peace, to extend this work and build it upon
a solid and permanent base. A Bureau of
Pictures was established and an important
branch was the origin of a sister Bureau for
Europe, its headquarters being in Paris; the
aim in view being the formation of a library
of films, demonstrating to the New World
how the Old World lived and how it had
suffered during the War.

The incentive for the development of this
idea by the Red Cross was created by urgent
representations made by thousands of schools
and churches throughout the length and
breadth of the United States, a stirring appeal
which could not be ignored.

A popular feature in the early days of the
educational curriculum was the extensive use
[42]

of the magic-lantern hour, in which inanimate
pictures were thrown upon a screen. This
was capital as far as it went, but obviously
the cinema could be utilised with a far greater
effect and satisfaction. From the commercial
standpoint it was found that the monetary
return from the exhibition of “educational
films” was not satisfactory. One film featuring
Mary Pickford would produce greater
profits than a perfect and complete library
of educational films!

The churches wishing to give film entertainments
on Sunday found the ordinary
films not suitable to their needs and sought
outside aid. The American Red Cross bridged
the gap. Thousands of schools and churches
are now in touch with this Picture Bureau,
whose work is administered through fourteen
divisions by which this movement is governed,
and every independent division is building
up its own library of specially selected films.
The aim and object is to procure films of
educational, scenic, hygienic, and industrial
interest. It also endeavours to cement the
allied friendship and cordial international
[43]

relations between the two great Anglo-Saxon
peoples.

This Bureau is equipped with a large and
efficient staff of expert photographers, and
when a film is taken this is duplicated and a
copy is dispatched to every division, accompanied
by a list of subjects which are at the
service of the schools, and if a certain demand
is shown for special films, this demand is
supplied.

The range of subjects when this project has
matured will be illimitable, and it will be
possible to co-ordinate them so that they can
be absorbed into the recognised curriculum.
It has been proved that children are interested
even by isolated subjects, contradicting any
contention that a child does not remember
a lesson which it receives by means of the
“movies.” This film lesson provides a welcome
break in the text-book grind, and is
the most popular and eagerly sought feature
in the school.

From an international aspect, the value of
the film is undoubted. All the American
children will by this means be able to visualize
[44]

the marvels of Europe, and, in addition, form
an idea of the surroundings in which many of
their fathers and brothers made the supreme
sacrifice in the defence of humanity.

These Red Cross films seen in their schools
will convey to them exactly what is being done,
and in this way the film will take its place as
an ambassador of perfect understanding,
cementing the already friendly relations existing
between the two countries. Over 6,000
schools in America have cinema rooms and
practically every new school being erected
in America is equipped with an up-to-date
cinema-operating room and theatre.

It behoves England to make greater strides
if she is to keep abreast of the times. The
question is asked: “What are we waiting for
before taking the plunge into this educative
speculation?” Possibly the deterrent is the
belated appearance of the completed inquiries
of the “Cinema Commission.” If it is truthfully
said that England is ten years behind
the American in dentistry, the same period
applies as regards the possibilities of the
cinema in relation to the school.

[45]
A conference of well-known educationists
recently assembled at Columbia University,
U.S.A., to examine a number of film subjects
on geography, biology, industry, and popular
astronomy, collected for the purpose by the
National Committee for Better Films. The
affiliated Committee for Better Films has
asked for suggestions and criticisms regarding
safety precautions, methods of furnishing
pictures in large quantities and other
matters.

The Federation of Child Study in conjunction
with the Women’s City Club, the National
Committee for Better Films and the Juvenile
Motion Picture League, have formulated a
scheme by which entertainments suitable for
young people are given in the various picture
theatres on Fridays and Saturdays, for which
the Committee select the films to be shown and
guarantee an audience. The University of
the State of New York are making every
endeavour to promote “visual education.”
The town of Wellesley, Massachusetts, has
“municipal movies” two days a week. The
State censorship is strongly opposed on the
[46]

ground that what is required is selection
and not censorship.

Instructing the Deaf Mute.

“List with thine eyes, and I will list with
mine,” is a revised version of a well-known
quotation which applies with considerable
point to the modern mode of conversation
between deaf mutes, who are taught, by the
close observation of the movements of a
speaker’s lips, to see, instead of to hear, what
is being said. This is where the cinema may
help our less fortunate brothers and sisters.
An effective film could be prepared which
would depict with great precision the lip action
which takes place as the various letters of the
alphabet are being articulated, and also the
similar change of appearance visible, as groups
of letters or words are uttered. Such an
alphabet and the graphic record of speech,
available for use over and over again, enabling
mute pupils to commit to heart, would make a
tedious task simplified.

[47]

In Mental Hospitals.

The effect of the film upon the healthy mind
is obvious, and its introduction in various
mental hospitals is now in the experimental
stage. Cinematograph entertainment has already
been provided in one of the Birmingham
mental asylums, and it is anticipated that
the exhibitions will materially help in the
recovery of the patients.

Medical Students.

The “daily press” tells us that the medical
profession is the latest convert to the cinematograph
as an aid to instruction. The
instrument is being utilized to record operations,
for presentation before medical students,
and in this manner a large number of unnecessary
operations will be prevented. It
is maintained that many intricate and delicate
operations can be more lucidly expounded
to the student by these biographic demonstrations
than is possible in the operating
theatre, during the carrying out of an operation,
or by means of anatomic diagrams.

[48]
Processes of bone-grafting have been thrown
upon the screen. Serial radiographs of the
stomach showing all the stages of digestion
have been revealed to an audience of surgeons.
One professor of neurology uses twenty-five
thousand feet of cinema film in teaching and
illustrating nervous and mental diseases. Even
the blood has not escaped the cinema-worker’s
relentless probing. By means of the ultra-micro-cinematograph
the corpuscles of the
blood are magnified to an enormous degree
and one is able to follow with ease precisely
what happens when the vital fluid is contaminated
by different foreign organisms, and
the terrific struggle that ensues for supremacy,
and the exact action produced by the administration
of various curative specifics. It is
evident that, in the battle against human
disease and death, the moving picture is
destined to play an astonishing part.

The Great War has provided some interesting
surgical opportunities, which, had they been
witnessed by those other than medical students,
would have been gruesome and revolting, yet
are interesting to the strong-nerved who can
[49]

withstand the odour of the warm blood of
human life. Take the case of a soldier shot
in the thigh by machine-gun bullets which
have made the head of the femur resemble
a sand sieve; watch the film, from the carrying
of the patient from the ward to the theatre,
the administration of the anæsthetic, and the
deep-chested breathing of the patient who
gradually succumbs to the sweet pungent
odour; note the interested audience of white-robed
sisters, nurses and surgeons; the well-placed
incision, the parting of the sinews and
muscles, and the removal of the head of the
“femur” to be replaced later by an exact
replica in silver.

In medical science the cinematograph should
become a most important aid in the instruction
of students.

[50]

III

LIBRARIES AND LITERATURE

School, Library, and Cinema.

What a force to be reckoned with would
be the combined efforts of school, library and
cinema as factors in education. These two
former sections have become more united
during the last few years. It is only recently
that the activities of the Public Library
Authorities have been fully appreciated by
the Education Authorities. The outlook is
now brighter, and a recognized harmony
exists; their efforts now being united for the
furtherance of educational ideals.

All educational aims should be to broaden,
deepen, improve and strengthen the childish
imagination, both sympathetic and intellectual.
If used without proper supervision, there is
not a more harmful agency than the cinema.

Mention is made elsewhere of the Cinema
[51]

Commission, the London County Council,
and the Birmingham Education Committee
and what they are undertaking on behalf of
the school.

Film Collections.

A nucleus could be a collection of twenty
films; four dealing with classics; four with
the surrounding things of everyday life, forming
general knowledge; four dealing with
foreign countries, their social life, games,
customs, etc.; four dealing with entomology,
zoology, etc.; four depicting the commercial
life, showing shipbuilding yards, steel works,
cotton and woollen factories, pottery manufacture,
etc. These films would broaden the
views and strengthen the imagination of
children.

The nucleus thus being formed, the films
could be circulated throughout the surrounding
counties, boroughs and towns; being
exhibited at the local library once a week.
In conjunction with these films, “reading
lists” could be prepared of books for home-reading,
and widely distributed. A change of
[52]

film could be made once a week, which means
that before the stock of films had completed
one round, five months would elapse, giving
ample time in which to procure future additions.

By bringing the cinema within his scope of
activities, the librarian adds materially to the
usefulness of the library to the community at
large, proving the sterling worth of such
an institution to the town. How this
financial venture is to be met and supported
will be the inevitable question, the answer to
which is by co-operation; each town or
borough taking a share of the burden and
contributing financially towards their maintenance.
An endeavour must be made to get
the local Education Authority interested, and
the battle is partly won. Submit to them a
practical scheme, on a sound business footing,
attractive and definite, and they will, after
careful consideration, give unstintingly their
financial support.

The whole of the country could be divided
into areas, such as North-Eastern, North-Western,
South-Eastern, South-Western, etc.,
[53]

where towns, etc., like Stretford, Manchester,
Stockport, Bolton, Wigan, Liverpool, Southport
and Chester could all produce a repertoire
of film subjects. Each Authority could be
responsible for the production of films relative
to their own manufacture, which could be
mapped out as follows:—

(1) Denton and Stockport, for hat manufacture,
showing the whole of the
process felt goes through, from the
raw material to the finished “Sandringham.”

(2) Bradford could give a tour of the woollen
mills.

(3) Nottingham the lace trade.

(4) Hanley the pottery trade.

(5) Oldham and Leigh the cotton trade.

(6) Atherton, etc., coal mining.

(7) Liverpool, the docks and shipping.

(8) Kent, for the strawberry and hop-growing
industries.

(9) Devonport, the dockyards, etc., etc.

There is ample scope for the treatment of
such subjects.

As described elsewhere, a Central Bureau
could be established, every film classified
according to subject, and from this Bureau
[54]

would emanate a steady flow of purely educational
films—teaching or imparting knowledge
in a popular manner.

Again, where space does not permit, either
in the schools or the local library, the allied
sympathy of the managers of the local cinemas
could be obtained, and one film could be
inserted as part of their programme, securing
for them the necessary audience, and at the
same time advertising the Education Authority
and the Library.

The aim of all libraries is to preserve knowledge
for succeeding generations, and films
such as those described in the preceding chapter—that
portion dealing with history taught by
the film—would be of permanent value for
reference.

The general idea of providing a permanent
record of historical events in the nation’s
history is worthy of universal encouragement,
and also of making these records easily accessible
for public enlightenment.

It has been said that the public library
should reflect every phase of mental activity,
not only the high and educational kind, but
[55]

also of the recreative, the social side of life.
A vast amount of enlightenment and instruction,
with remarkable force and rapidity,
can be conveyed by the aid of the cinematograph.
“Every picture tells a story,” whether
it be of wonder or beauty, or of travels and
national customs; some enlightenment may
be gained from the exhibition. The seed sown
by the pictures of this or that city, whether
abroad or at home, may, eventually, be reaped
in improved conditions of life and its surroundings.
A clearer conception, a more
sensible interpretation of the wonderful things
around us, is shown than could ever be conveyed
by a professor’s treatise, or an artist’s
impressions.

Preservation of the Film.

Libraries in general have failed to appreciate
the educational value of the cinematograph
during the growth of the last fifteen years.
For years now the National Board of Censorship
has been urging the development of the
use of educational films.

The first attempt at anything in the nature
[56]

of a Lending Library of Films was inaugurated
by Gaumont & Co., in 1904. The scheme
enabled the amateur or professional possessor
of a cinematograph-projecting apparatus, to
hire or loan on reasonable terms a selection
of film subjects, so that by the outlay of one
guinea per night, the private exhibitor could
command an inexhaustible supply of film
subjects.

There are a number of elements entering
into the production, distribution, and the
public exhibition of pictures. The raw stock
of celluloid from which films are manufactured
has a limited existence. The base of the film
is usually of a highly inflammable composition.
Again, before the pictures are perfected, for
public exhibition, the producer’s outfit should
include highly perfected cameras, studios,
staging, and star actors, and a search, often,
for appropriate outdoor settings for the scenes
to be enacted. The skilful direction of people
and scenes to obtain illusions requires an
expert at the business; for it necessitates
a high grade of technical ability for the production
of scenic, travel, and scientific pictures
[57]

with the minimum film waste. Once the
picture has been constructed, prepared with
subjects and sub-titles, and has been submitted
to the Board of Censorship, it must be extensively
advertised, circulated amongst exchanges
throughout the kingdom, and the
commands of the public exhibitors awaited.
All these complicated processes have emanated
from the regular daily demand of the people
for entertainment, not necessarily enlightenment.
The manufacturers know the percentage
of film subjects demanded, whether tragic,
thrilling, artistic, humorous, or educational.

I will give some idea as to the film. Each
picture in size is roughly three-quarters by
one inch; the average length of a black and
white film is 1000 feet, giving a total of 16,000
pictures. When rolled this film fills a tin box—allowing
for the fact that it is round—equal
to the size of a royal octavo volume, but considerably
heavier. Thus it is evident that
the question of space is unimportant. The
number of films produced and published does
not equal the number of books published in
the same time. A great number of the films
[58]

published are unsuitable for preservation,
and, therefore, would find no place in a National
Historical Repository.

The method of the present classification
of books would be applied to the classification
of the films, covering, as they do, historical,
scientific, artistic, and technical subjects. The
life of the film depends upon its treatment.
The period varies, but when in daily use it
should last for twelve years; and, if every
care has been taken, and the film is seldom
used, it will last for fifty years. Twenty-five
years may be taken as a fair average under
ordinary methods. Of course, new films can
be reprinted from the old, and therefore, no
film need be discarded.

A fairly satisfactory solution of the difficulty
of making provision for a regular service of
films at a minimum cost would be the appropriation,
annually, by the State, of a sufficient
sum to allow the purchase of a number of
the best films by State Libraries, or (seeing
that libraries now come under the protecting
wing of the Education Authorities) by a
State Department of Education. This increasing
[59]

library of films could be held at the
disposal of Library Authorities who contribute
towards its acquisition and maintenance.

Library of Films in Berlin.

In October, 1914, a “Library of Films”
was opened in Berlin. This Berlin depository
already possesses a very large collection of
valuable films, dealing especially with scientific
and allied subjects, which is probably unequalled
elsewhere. In connection with the
library an Intelligence Bureau has been opened,
where advice can be obtained on all matters
connected with the cinematograph and its
uses.

Its resources are inexhaustible and the
films may be borrowed for purposes of instruction
by Educational Authorities and
other allied bodies. It is established for the
national preservation of historical and other
films, and will become invaluable as the
years roll on, from the historic point of view.

Advertising the Library.

I was once asked the question, “Why do
[60]

not libraries give greater publicity to their
activities, means and resources, and not be
satisfied with the fact that they are merely
performing an everyday public function, expected
of them as a municipal institution
which gives some sort of return to the ratepayers
for the rate levied upon them for its
maintenance?”

True, some of the ratepayers are quite
satisfied when they can go to the local library
and borrow one or two books to while away
a few leisure hours during a wet week-end.
Herein lies a small conception of what a public
library is for.

The library at the present time, if it is to
maintain its popularity, must be aggressive
and not passive. We must not be content to
rest on our oars and survey what we have
done with a complacent smile of satisfaction,
and say, “I have done my best,” but we must
think what we can do next to keep the vision
of usefulness of the public library ever before
the public. The library is like the tree in
nature, once it ceases to grow it commences to
decay, and this food for further thought must
[61]

be provided by the initiative of the librarian,
providing he is an enthusiast. If cheap stories
so often depicted could be replaced by such
films as “The Odyssey,” “Hamlet,” “Evangeline,”
the cinematograph would become a
distinct influence for good.

It has been voiced at some of the conferences
that systematized propaganda work
is needed. I am glad to see that the Library
Association has at last awakened to the fact
that the educational value of the Public Library
is not known as it should be. The appointment
of a “Publicity Committee” shows that
a determined effort is being made to launch out
into something original, and, I hope, something
which will demand world-wide attention.

Anyone interested in Library work cannot
fail to see that such a popular and powerful
agent as the film must have an effect upon
the Public Libraries. Cinemas are not on
the wane, but are considerably on the increase.
Now that the ban on “luxury building” has
been removed, these buildings—in some cases
“super-cinemas” embodying every convenience—will
spring up everywhere. One very
[62]

seldom, if ever, hears of a cinema being
“wound up” for bankruptcy; these picture-houses
are too popular, and this popularity
will remain as long as one generation succeeds
another.

The film can arouse an enthusiasm in
heretofore disinterested readers, and expose
to them the pleasures and joys of life they are
missing, and only the totally illiterate can
ignore it.

Possibly it is not generally known by
librarians that managers of cinemas are
genial individuals, willing to oblige in a little
library publicity, and where the library is in
close proximity, so much the better.

What I refer to is a “screened advertisement”
on behalf of the library authorities,
calling attention to the fact that the book
from which the film is produced may be
borrowed from the Central Library and its
branches, which medium has been advocated
in Mr. Walter Briscoe’s book on “Library
Advertising.”

Here is the idea for a permanent local
“publicity” campaign, and in due course the
[63]

Library Association, backed up by Government
recognition, may launch out into a
national programme of recognition.

Some may advocate publicity by means of
specially trained orators, who would demonstrate
from public platforms in forcible arguments
the advantages of the Public library;
others may convene dinner-hour meetings
and deliver speeches to working men and
women as during an election; others may
urge the use of public hoardings or electric
signs in public places, changing colour every
few seconds.

It is admitted that the Press is a powerful
organ, proclaiming to every reading individual
items of interest within its pages. This is
good so far as it goes. Possibly advertising in
it would be repaid where the paper has access
to every home, and even then there is the
possibility of its being overlooked, unless the
headline be emblazoned in red. Some people
when perusing their favourite papers look
for one thing of interest to them only. Some
scan the stock and share markets; others
devour the racing news; some look at the
[64]

advertisement columns in the hope of finding
a house to let; the gentler sex invariably
peruse the bargain sales—so there is a danger
of library matters being overlooked.

Some new tactics must be tried; something
which will yield better results, something
which will meet the gaze of young or old—and
there is that all-powerful national appealing
projector, the cinematograph. This will
explain with greater efficiency than either the
public Press, the hoarse-voiced orator, or any
other medium.

People who remain ignorant or illiterate
need no longer remain in this stage. If they
do not know the alphabet, they can be taught
it; if they cannot write they can be shown
how to wield a pen, and the various styles
of writing—backhand, roundhand, copper-plate
or script, all by means of text-books
obtainable at the library.

The poorest man, without any visible means,
living in a garret, has this store of wealth
at his disposal just for the asking. Anyone
wishing to become acquainted with a foreign
language to aid him in his business can learn
[65]

by the “self-taught series.” Thousands of
people in these circumstances could be made
acquainted with the treasures of the library
by means of the film.

“
Publicity Films.
”

The Public Library “Lending Department”
would make an admirable film, showing, as it
would, borrowers selecting their books and
being assisted by the library assistants.
Continuing, the books themselves could be
shown in the process of opening. In the
natural history section the various phases of
nature would be seen by the eye; the philology
section would disclose the people of the various
ages, dressed in keeping with the period, and
the language they spoke; and the literary
section would open to view the poets of the
various ages and the poems they wrote.

A book-stack would revolve; a book would
open in the historical section on the history
of England, showing early Britons in their
prehistoric dress, and these would change as
the various periods in the nation’s history was
passed through.

[66]
Here is the chance of a lifetime for the
exponents of the uses and utility of the Library
of which they should take every advantage.
There are some people who do not even know
that public libraries actually exist in their
midst, and what facilities they freely offer.
They have yet to realize that the Library is
in reality the People’s University, instituted
to enable everyone to acquire knowledge and
enlightenment.

It would not be impossible to prepare a
film on a much wider scale, the production of
which would probably run into similar figures
to those of the biggest “releases.” (I hope
readers will not blame me for being an idealist!)
For national publicity purposes a film
on “
The Public Library: its Evolution
and Possibilities
” could be prepared, depicting
the remarkable modern growth of
this valuable institution. The veil of obscurity
could be torn aside, and that erroneous impression
dispelled that the library is a very
modern institution. The interested person
could retrace his steps in the annals of library
history as far back as it is possible to go.

[67]

Library History.

Before our eyes would actually be shown
the fact that books themselves were not
always of the material so familiar to us.
Knowledge could be extended far beyond the
invention of the printing-press; metal, stone,
bricks, walls, pillars, and even the rocks of
Nature’s own production were used to convey
information to succeeding generations. We
should be brought into close contact with
the libraries of Assyria, Babylonia and
Chaldea, the three ancient empires of which
the most is known. There will be seen the
palace-temple of Nippur, founded not later
than 2280
B.C.
, the “tomes” classified and
catalogued on shelves in the most approved
manner, some 200,000 clay bricks being exhibited.

The period of the Greeks would prove
interesting, storing the archives in the temples
of the Gods, during the sixth century
B.C.

The Romans would be pictured amassing their
libraries as spoils of war; the first to be
established in 168
B.C.
by Aemilius Paulus—the
[68]

librarian being a slave or freeman. Time
progresses with the passing of the film—Bishop
Alexander is seen establishing the first
Christian library at Jerusalem in
A.D.
212.
The libraries later meet with a catastrophe,
being swept away by the invasion of the Goths
and barbarians of the Western Empire in
the fifth century. From the fall of the
Western Empire to the Revival of Learning
in the fifteenth century the libraries passed
into the hands of the monks, who were the
collectors of the Middle Ages. Here they could
appear, working in the monasteries, writing
on parchment rolls. Every Benedictine house
was equipped with a library.

Interest quickens as the rapid growth of
libraries in England becomes apparent—at
Jarrow, Lichfield, Whitby, and other places
in the North of England. The gradual
developments from these libraries to early
town libraries, the various types, remodelled
to suit the requirements demanded by mental
enlightenment, would all create interest and
pleasure.

The modern library would prove the most
[69]

interesting. The shelves upon shelves of
books, closely classified, yet so simple, would
evoke admiration. The visual procession of
saints and sages, warriors and martyrs, the
upholders of justice and freedom, as they
stepped from their places upon the shelves,
would create wonderment.

Single shelves bridge the intervals of time;
generations upon generations of men congregate
there.

From the film, the demonstration shows
that through the medium of books one can
witness the plague of Athens or London,
without contagion; follow Caesar upon his
marches; stand by the side of Agricola as he
regards Ireland and says that some day he will
“go over and take it”; rove the Dark Continent
with Stanley, and learn the secrets of
artificial and natural flight with Sir Hiram
Maxim. Similarly, readers would transport
their thoughts according to the nature of the
literature indulged in by them.

It could be shown that no matter what
our tastes are, whether they be inventive or
whether we prefer to be in the company of
[70]

a celebrated humourist, the library will supply
all wants.

Other activities in connection with the
Library could be shown: the travelling
libraries setting out to the rural districts, the
door-to-door calls, the issuing of books to
our isolated brethren. Lastly, our work with
the children in the juvenile library and reading
rooms, and the establishment of libraries in
the schools.

What more material can the publicity
exponent desire than lies here within his reach—the
film for perfect propaganda work? It
only needs to be utilized. By means of one
human effort for the creation of such a film,
its duplication to any number, its use either
in the libraries, the local cinema, or public
hall, the whole of the population of England
could be enlightened simultaneously or gradually,
and the efforts of the publicists would be
rewarded by the Public Library being placed
in its right sphere as an educational institution;
its use to the community would be
recognized and the demand upon its resources
would be increased.

[71]
We as librarians, custodians of books, must
acknowledge the significance of the cinematograph.
We have in projectors a valuable aid
to our works as educators. The “movies”
are the coming apostles of education; in
them we have the world in miniature, and its
value as an educative force can hardly be
over-estimated. In a very few years every
well-equipped library will be installed with its
own cinematograph apparatus, and possibly
its own asbestos-lined cinema-operating room,
as at Stockport, for instance.

The Book.

A film on the making of a book could be
made decidedly interesting, showing the many
processes that go to the making of a book;
from the arrival of the manuscript to the
purchase of the book at a shop, and the
customer reading it at home. Such a film has
been prepared by Messrs. Doubleday Page &
Co., Garden City, New York. The film can
portray the living characters of books, and
readers usually derive more pleasure from
reading after the characters have been portrayed
upon the screen.

[72]

The Film as Mental Ally.

Much enlightenment may be derived from
the film. There are some people, who during
their lifetime spend too much time on petty
details, a fair proportion of every community
are totally incapable of following any line of
thought to its logical conclusion. Some people,
whilst reading a book, have to depend upon
a bookmark to locate the place where they
are reading, instead of being able to pick up
the book and recommence, remembering where
they discontinued previously. Concentration
of thought whilst reading, a complete assimilation
of the facts contained in the book, and the
capability of understanding what has been
read, would obviate the necessity of any
temporary bookmark. The fact of remembering
what has been read will readily indicate
the place to recommence reading.

Some people will read a novel, and at the
end cannot recall the characters in the book,
or what part they have taken in the story.
Such a hapless habit is to be deprecated.
Others possess a more retentive memory and
[73]

read a book with a definite purpose, and at the
conclusion, or even some considerable time
afterwards, could enumerate every detail, fit
in every character, the moral they present,
and even tell one the defects therein. To
such people as the forementioned, the film
would be of great assistance; not only to
give a correct rendering, visually, of the book,
but to help them to remember facts and
characters.

There are the class of people, few in number,
who own and use their own libraries, and have
little use for the Public Library. Another
class, slightly larger, but still, numerically,
only a small portion of the population, know
books and use the Public Library freely and
with intelligence. The remainder, or more
than half the average community, need to be
taught its value and purpose.

Filmed Literature.

The “movies” make their appeal through
the rapidity with which the plot of the story
is carried along, and the exaggerated emphasis
with which the different points are brought
[74]

out. It is a primary or kindergarten for the
schooling of those people into the region of
emotional experiences. By co-operating with
the “movies” the Library in time might be
able to grade the work so that a brief and
simple love-story might be heard or read with
understanding. The repetition of the visual
presentation of the idea possible in a moving
picture would help to make its meaning clear.

Take a novel as an example: in this case
Ethel M. Dell’s “The Keeper of the Door.”
The chief character is the doctor or surgeon,
who makes every endeavour to retain life in
the human body, he being the keeper of the
door, not allowing the spirit to depart. There
is something really beautiful as this picture is
portrayed: the vigilance of the doctor, and
the kindness and patience of the nurse; yet
in spite of all this attention the activity of
the patient is slowly waning, and then the
last breath is taken and human life ceases
to be.

Other features create interest—the surroundings,
the way the characters play their
part, and the emblematical representations
[75]

all create a longing to read the book. In
reading, the whole scenes return as witnessed;
greater interest is created, and one cannot
imagine a person losing his place of reading,
or the inability to fit the characters in their
places, even after some considerable time has
elapsed.

[76]

IV

SOCIAL

The Cinema Commission.

The National Council of Public Morals
embraces many subjects in its activities; for
some years it has been keenly interested in the
influence of the cinematograph upon young
people, with the possibilities of its development
and with its adaptation to national
educational purposes. The President (the
Bishop of Birmingham), with the Rev. F. B.
Meyer, D.D., took a leading part; the first
Cinematograph Congress being held at Olympia
in 1913.

The Commission did not seek to abuse the
people responsible for the promotion of the
cinema by outspoken raillery, but met representatives
of the whole trade in frank discussion
of the best means of ridding the community
of whatever evil elements existed,
[77]

and meeting the demands of the best public
opinion for a higher class programme; suitable
exhibitions for juvenile minds, for the suppression
of certain evils which had temporarily
blighted the cinema halls, and lastly
for the establishment of a national censorship
which would give the necessary freedom for
the proper development of the cinematograph,
whilst prohibiting all undesirable films.

At a meeting held in London on November
24, 1916, representatives of the Cinematograph
Trade Council, the Incorporated Association
of Kinematograph Manufacturers, Ltd., the
Kinematograph Renters’ Society of Great
Britain and Ireland met together, and it was
finally resolved—

“That the National Council of Public
Morals be requested to institute an independent
inquiry into the physical, social,
moral, and educational influence of the
cinema, with special reference to young
people.”

The terms of reference to the Commission
were:—

(1) To institute an inquiry into the physical,
social, educational, and moral influences
[78]

of the cinema, with special
reference to young people.

(2) The present position and future development
of the cinematograph, with
special reference to social and educational
value and possibilities.

(3) To investigate the nature and extent of
the complaints which have been made
against the cinematograph exhibitions.

(4) To report to the National Council the
evidence taken, together with its
findings and recommendations.

The Cinema Commission commenced its
labours on January 8, 1917, and terminated
on July 9, 1917. Forty-three witnesses were
examined, representing the different interests
in the country. In addition to the time taken
up for the hearing of these witnesses, sittings
were held at a private theatre for the inspection
of the films complained of. It also
extensively visited cinema halls in the course
of its labours.

The headings for discussion were:—The
standard of judgment, Special consideration
regarding the cinema as a place of amusement,
The moral dangers of darkness, The character
[79]

of the film, Need of a stricter censorship,
Special claims of children, Special inquiry
regarding the influence of the picture house
upon children, Juvenile crime, Replies of chief
constables, Ideas of life and conduct, Special
provision for the young, The value of the
picture house, The cinema as a counter-attraction
to the public-house.

The Commission also adopted the roll of
educational expert, carrying out a number
of psychological experiments.

(1) The durability of cinema impressions
on school children;

(2) Mental fatigue caused by instruction
by means of the cinema;

(3) Tests of education by cinematographical
methods, in comparison with the
ordinary method of instruction;

(4) In which direction the most fruitful
and permanent results could be obtained
by the cinema;

(5) The possibility of the cinema in cultivating
an æsthetic appreciation;

(6) The most advantageous way of correlating
the work of the school with
that of the cinema, and the most
economical method of using the
cinema for this purpose;

[80]

(7) The collection of evidence with regard
to experiments which have already
been carried out effectively by using
the cinema for educational purposes;

(8) The best methods of producing suitable
films for school purposes.

This report is exhaustive and is the findings
of laborous sittings, full of material treating
upon the cinema question from all possible
sides. The debates have been carried out by
representatives of every section of the community;
the decisions are unbiassed, full of
truth, suggestions, and remedies.

Film Censorship.

Owing to the objectionable character of
some of the imported films, the question of
an independent censorship was discussed at
the latter end of 1911, and in October, 1912,
with the approval of the Home Secretary,
the Board of Censors was established and
official duties were commenced in January,
1913. Entire independence and impartiality
were assured, and are claimed to have been
maintained by the Board of Censors.

[81]
It was decided to issue certificates classed
as follows:—

U. Films to be shown to any audience.

A. Films to be shown to adults only.

This Board passes about 97 per cent. of
films passing through its hands.

Two rules were laid down—

(1) That the living figure of Christ should
not be allowed.

(2) That under no circumstances whatever
would nudity be permitted.

The Examiners judged upon the broad
principle that nothing should be passed which
in their opinion would demoralize an audience.
They laid down forty-three reasons for refusing
to pass films.

The question is often asked in the public
Press, and occasionally in Parliament, “What
has become of the censor? Why does
he not exercise his powers of suppression?
Is there such an office?” This question is
becoming increasingly urgent and acute.

There has been a tendency for the last two
years to allow to filter through on to the
[82]

public market films distasteful to modest
vision. The so-called comic films are becoming
more and more suggestive. We are aware
that the modern tendency in female attire is
to lower the neck and shorten the skirt.
There is beauty in a painted nude figure,
showing the perfect formation of limbs; this
is from the standpoint of art.

It is the prevailing fashion in modern
American “comedy films” for “bathing
belles” to figure largely, and this is unnecessary
unless the film actually depicts seaside life,
surf-bathing, or is advertising a standard
bathing costume approved of by the exponents
of the “modiste” costume. There are also
passages in these films which call for the
excision of certain portions.

A flagrant breach of “censorship” is occasioned
by allowing a film of the following
nature to appear upon the open market.
This depicts a Chinaman who runs an opium
den, and who is also a money-lender. The
story goes that he has designs upon a pretty
English girl. To become acquainted, he advances
money to her father, followed by further
[83]

loans, which are used as a lever; for the father
finally forces his pretty daughter to marry the
Chinaman.

The scene changes to the girl’s bedroom,
where the pretty wife, clad in a diaphanous
nightdress, has a terrific struggle with the
Chinaman.

Only one conclusion is possible, and there is
no moral attached to the picture, which only
produces a feeling of disgust—that the paternal
human nature should have been so shown as
actually existing between father and daughter.

Juvenile Crime.

Crime films are another section which should
not escape the critical eye of the censor. It
has been suggested that in some cases acts
of crime by juveniles have been incited by
seeing similar scenes enacted upon the screen.
They have endeavoured to imitate and emulate
the pictorial crime creator, who was lucky
enough to evade the long arm of the law, by
which they themselves were caught.

One cannot imagine for one moment that
the display of films showing murder, suicide,
[84]

arson, violence or theft, would leave a happy
impression upon the human mind. It only
fires the impressionable mind of the juvenile,
who ultimately finds himself arraigned in the
“juvenile court.” Such films only injure the
reputation of the cinemas exhibiting them,
because sensible parents will forbid their
children to enter such places.

The prevention of crime is depicted by a
series of “Police pictures” in the Metropolis.
This film, promoted to defend that great wall
which defines the orderly and disorderly
sections of the community, shows “Robert”
(as he is lovingly called) in the discharge of
his duties, which is not only to exercise a
ceaseless vigilance, but to come into contact
with danger of which many of us are ignorant.

It shows us the daily routine of every
member of the police force, from the highest
to the lowest rank. Scotland Yard is seen in
all its specialized branches. One can see the
detectives being trained to prevent and discover
crime, and the manner in which they
run social offenders to justice, and the deductions
leading up to the trail.

[85]
The policeman is shown as a friend and helper
to the young and aged, and children nowadays
are taught to regard him as someone to appeal
to in case they are lost, and not to run away
at sight as if pursued by a spectre.

Morality Tests.

A comprehensive attempt is being made in
the United States to improve the quality of
the films shown, and for this purpose a
“National Motion Picture League” has been
formed. It is proposed to elevate the standard
in two ways—first by supervising and conducting
children’s matinées, and assisting
churches, municipal boards of education,
parents’ associations and other organizations
interested in public welfare to secure proper
pictures for adults, young people and children.
In the second place it will assist, by proper
publicity, towards the provision of good
pictures and a campaign of education against
the immoral and objectionable ones.

A reviewing board has been formed by the
League, composed of clergymen, Sunday school
teachers and public welfare workers. This
[86]

Board makes a selection from the general
output of films, and a list of those which they
deem suitable will be published in weekly
bulletins before the pictures are released for
the open market and public exhibition. These
lists are sent to the film-producers, and are
published in magazines. Local committees
are formed everywhere to unite in their efforts
and use every influence. These committees
are of two kinds—children’s matinées, which
seek to provide suitable programmes for
youthful minds; and reviewing committees,
which report on all pictures seen in local
picture theatres which are considered suitable
for the lists of the League.

The films selected are clever and wholesome
throughout. Films unsuitable, even though
the details exercise the moral ending, are
rigidly excluded. They have to be in good
taste, unbiassed and accurate. The board
refuses to endorse a film that is inaccurate
from a scientific standpoint or that contains
undesirable inaccuracies in the production
of well-known stories.

No crimes are allowed in pictures if they
[87]

show killing or gunplay, and there must also be
no cruelty to either man or beast. Infidelity
and sex pictures are not tolerated, and even
scenes of women smoking or men drinking
are debarred.

A rule has been instituted which would
produce good in this country, and should be
followed. All titles and letter-press must be
strictly grammatical and free from profanity
or vulgarity.

The following is a label on a film after
having passed through their hands:—

“In part 3, cut out scenes of mixing drinks.”
In part 6 cut out sub-title, “You don’t care
a damn,” etc., also all drinking scenes.

In short, the National Association of the
Motion-Picture Industry has resolved to suppress
and refrain from films that “emphasize
vice or the sex appeal or illicit love; exhibit
nudity, excessive demonstrations of passion,
and vulgar postures; unduly concern themselves
with the underworld of crime, bloodshed
and violence, drunkenness, gambling, and
unnatural practices; emphasize the methods
used in committing crime; bring into ridicule
[88]

the law, the authorities, and religious beliefs
and leaders; contain salacious titles, or are
advertised salaciously.”

The “White Scourge” Problem.

The “white slave traffic” is as much a
scourge as tuberculosis. This appalling problem
is sapping the vitality of the nation, and
every means of giving publicity to this menace,
which, unfortunately, is not on the wane,
should be used. We have the best possible
publicity agent in the film. Such a film could
be prepared and exhibited to initiate the
ignorant, and to show those who practise in
it that something is being done openly to
expose this illicit traffic.

One reads in the newspapers almost daily
of wrecked lives, fathers who have shot their
daughters and then themselves, because she
has trodden the downward path; and of
others who have made away with themselves
because they are beyond reclamation.

This subject is talked about, and often
whispered, as if it were a plague and they
were afraid of becoming infected with it.

[89]
It is a plague, and requires to be stamped
out, like the Plague of London.

The daily life of the unfortunate daughter
of the streets and her means of livelihood
could not be portrayed more eloquently. The
efforts of the reclaimer of lost souls would be
strengthened. Mothers would give silent
prayers for the imparting of such information
to their daughters, which, although their
duty, it is often shunned, to the detriment
of her offspring.

In a clean, inoffensive and simple way it
could be shown how unfortunate girls, attracted
by finery and dress, are sometimes directly
led into these channels.

If the book entitled “The Rise and Fall of
Susan Lennox” could be suitably filmed, then
much would have been accomplished in this
direction.

Mrs. Caudle’s “Curtain Lectures” would
not be needed at home. The impression upon
the young mind would be indelible. The
voiceless foster-mother would repeat the lesson
to thousands of young people.

The allied question “venereal disease” has
[90]

already appeared upon the screen and thousands
have already benefited by it. The
Manchester Corporation has taken steps to
give publicity by means of the film, and if the
idea is generally approved and encouraged,
much will be done to educate citizens of the
dangers of this malignant disease. Let us
hope that greater efforts will be made to bring
these evils home.

Churches and the Cinema.

Now that ministers are bemoaning the
smallness of their congregations, and declaring
that the flock has gone astray, wondering how
to account for the fact that modern-day
religious opinions have changed, and in some
cases, warped; that they no longer come to
hear good sermons and music, that the collections
are mean; that their social functions
are unattended—they ask themselves, “What
is wrong, and what is the remedy?”

The cinema has been tried in the church to
evoke that enthusiasm now dormant. In
America it has met with huge success and is
being recommended by the clerical body
[91]

throughout that country as a means of reviving
lost interest. Ministers’ sermons have
brought to life the actual characters; there
seems to be a new atmosphere within the
sacred precincts, and the churches are not large
enough to hold the congregations. The sermons
are more lucidly expounded, the attention
of the congregation is held, no stentorian
snores reverberate through the church, there is
no coughing or impatient moving of feet or
imperfect sneezing; and even the child with
its contribution in its pocket keeps it there
without dropping it on the floor. Such rapt
attention has been evoked by the film entitled
“Creation.” This Italian production presents
the history of the Old Testament in pictorial
form. The film begins with Creation and
closes with the reign of King Solomon, the
total length is 30,000 feet, and it is in twenty-two
chapters.

Could one see a more realistic film than the
actual creation of the world, the birth of
Christ in the manger, His movements amongst
the people, the healing of the sick, the restoration
of sight to the blind, the lame made to
[92]

walk, His successes and failures, His friends
and His enemies, and the conversion of His
disciples, His last supper, crucifixion and final
resurrection?

No minister need appeal for a more stirring
picture, a better demonstration than this;
his sermons would be more explicit and better
understood. Films could be created to suit
every sermon, or sermons could be worded to
suit the picture chosen, and to one versed
in theology, notes would be unnecessary.
Enthusiasm would grip the preacher as the
film rolled on, and words would come easily
and spontaneously.

A new picture just “released” in Sweden
would do well in this direction, the title of
which is “Thy soul shall bear witness.” It
is a sermon in pictures, more graphically
described than by any pen; and is beautifully
told and accurately expressed.

The story is of an outcast waiting in a
graveyard for the New Year to dawn, in order
that he and his comrades may drink a curse
to the months that are to come. A young
social worker on her deathbed is calling for
[93]

him, but he ignores the call. Even his friends
are disgusted with his behaviour as he tells
them the legend of the cart of death which
drives everywhere and collects the souls of
the dead, the driver being the man who has
died on New Year’s Day. He falls under the
spell of a social worker who battles to save
his soul, and to restore him to his constant
and faithful wife. He finally awakens, to
find it a horrible dream and that he has slept
in the churchyard. Other items enter the
story, but the impression left behind remains,
leaving the moral intended.

The Film and the Savage.

One would hardly think that the film has
reached and is being used in some of the
remotest corners of the globe, yet such is the
case. The advance made in this direction
of the education of these savages by means of
the film has been a source of help to the missionaries.
These natives, quick-witted, are
apt to learn far quicker from motion pictures
than from personal instruction. The effects
are sometimes very humorous, imitation is
[94]

often indulged in, and bobbed hair and short
skirts have created such an impression that the
fashion prevails as far away as Jamaica. The
black belle “bobs” her hair and even covers
her skin with a pearl powder overlaid with
rouge and a peculiar dark red in imitation
of her Western sister.

She tucks in her print skirt, and if she is
accustomed to going barefooted during the
week, on Sunday she will appear in vivid silk
stockings. She wears a hat woven by herself,
with a twisted impressionistic scarf such as
the heroine in a screen play wears when she
sallies forth to meet her hero. It is contended
that there is already a marked improvement
in the manners and customs, which schools
have not been able to bring about.

There is ample scope for pioneer work
amongst these dusky brethren, and the projector
would go a long way towards attaining
this end.

Co-operative Cinemas.

Mr. George Bernard Shaw says, “There is
no reason why cinema theatres should not be
[95]

added to the list of public wants provided for
by the co-operative movement.” Certainly
the Co-operative Society have their interests
in nearly every concern going. For the instruction
of their members, physically and
mentally, they have made every endeavour
to fill in the gaps. If their energies were also
turned to the establishment of cinemas for
educational purposes, including instructional
and wholesome films, then co-operators will
have made a forward movement.

[96]

V

COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING

Advertising by the Film.

As an advertising medium the film stands
unrivalled, and, probably, in time to come,
it will supplant the flaring posters so distasteful
to our vision, and which disfigure and
desecrate our landscapes.

Various manufacturing firms could further
avail themselves of this latest product of
visual exhibition. Manufacturers of gas
mantles could demonstrate the whole process
of the manufacture of these flimsy yet durable
illuminators, from the extracting of the
fibre to the finished article, the candle powers
of each, and what they are used for.

Again, an opportunity occurs for the Ediswan,
Mazda, Tantalum and other electric
bulb manufacturers to represent the blowing
of the glass and the fixing of the sensitive
[97]

filaments which convey the electric current
and produce cheap illumination.

British and colonial railways have found
the cinema a good substitute for the glaring
advertisements in their endeavours to lure the
holiday-makers to the beauty and health
spots served by their train systems. This
method of advertising would speak more
than volumes and be more vividly impressed
upon the minds of the audience than by many
an hour of searching through railway and
holiday guides, or touring announcements.

Visualize a trip on one of the railways—say,
passing through impressive mountainous
scenery. As each station is passed and the
journey progresses, bird’s-eye views could be
shown of fruitful and restful country never
seen before, and sometimes it would help to
influence a holiday-maker who is contemplating
where to go for his next holiday.

The Continent could be advertised upon
the screen by companies conducting tours.
We should see Parisian life as it is lived, the
boulevards and cafes, and everywhere the
places of national importance. The architecture
[98]

of our towns is too often deplorable,
and in contrast to that seen in towns like
Hamburg, Frankfort, Brussels or Milan, not
to mention the great capitals and the cities
of historic beauty and significance like Florence,
Venice and Nuremburg; these majestic structures
would appeal to all lovers of the finer
arts.

The prejudiced and those behind the times
may argue that the “pictures” are suited
only to the illiterate. But, judge the cinema
as our minds dictate, the fact remains that
this new vitalizing force has entered into the
educational progress of to-day.

Sales by the Film.

Keen competition in manufactured articles
has brought about increasing difficulties in the
sales of machinery. The manufacturer has
learned, by sad experience, that it is sometimes
impossible to convince his prospective
customer of the superiority of his product over
that of a rival firm, without actual inspection.
Size prevents him from carrying his machine
to the customer, and distance will not permit
[99]

the customer to go to the machine. In this
dilemma the progressive manufacturer has
joyfully hailed the advent of the motion
picture film which enables him to display
every step in the manufacture of the machine
or articles, and every phase of its operation.

When the maker of machinery, plants, and
equipment asks the average person to look
over blue prints and written descriptions, and
thus form a conclusion as to the worth of his
products, he usually finds himself in a difficulty.
It is mentally impossible for the general run
of people to visualize or imagine a plant or
machinery in working and running order from
an inspection of drawings and written descriptions,
no matter how graphic or conclusive
they may be.

Machines are generally too large to be
shipped around for inspection by the prospective
customer. It is physically impossible
to ship all plants and processes, and very
frequently the prospective purchaser cannot
arrange to visit a place where machinery can
be inspected. The modern motion projector
is light in weight, small in size, and can be
[100]

easily operated. Films can be shown at any
place, at any time, and are the ideal method
of demonstrating the salesman’s wares. Some
manufacturers are making a speciality of these
portable projectors, which may be tapped to
the lighting circuit and used in the office of
the prospective customer, with a blank wall
as a screen.

This method of exhibition has been hailed
with delight, and the number of manufacturers
availing themselves of this medium of salesmanship
grows in number day by day.

[101]

VI

PRODUCTION

One writer gloomily said, recently, that every
cinema was in a bad way, and inferred that
the films were a failure; the distressing
shrinkage of the audiences signified the general
non-approval of the tone of the films submitted.
It is not that the people have not the money;
in spite of the stress of the times, cinema
theatres are the best patronized places of
amusement, and the fact that these companies
are paying a dividend (anything from seventy-five
to ninety per cent.), spells, in one word,
“success,” which means a good turnover and
good profits.

The Failure and Success of the Film.

I do agree in this respect, that the British
public is becoming much more critical, and
in time will insist that it get its value, or else
will steer clear of the cinemas. It is for the
[102]

managership to provide the films with the
necessary tone. There are several factors
governing this criticism and decline, and one
is that the English film production started
with an unsound foundation, or a bad tradition.
Give a dog a bad name and it will
stick to it, and to retrieve a lost reputation is
a difficult feat, yet not an impossible one.

If the British producers were composed of
Englishmen alone, and not a conglomeration
of nationalities, the plots in the various novels
and plays would be produced exactly as
intended and not murdered and warped as
at the present time. To read the book, then
see the play, and finally the film, one is
astonished at the vast difference in the rendering;
the whole plot being considerably
changed.

The rendering of the film should be exactly
the same as the play, and as one reads, yet
it is widely different. It is either “cut” or
lengthened; the important is ignored and the
unimportant is enlarged upon, showing in
striking features the blunders perpetrated.
What is the result of this doctoring? Instead
[103]

of the producers raking in the thousands and
pleasing millions of patrons, the whole production
is a miserable failure, and the reputation
of the author as a writer is belittled in
the eyes of the public.

To prevent this, the producers could approach
the author to supervise the production
and pay him a nominal retaining fee, and the
public would be assured of an exact reproduction
of the play or plot they have seen
acted, and wish to see filmed.

In film production the British would create
an improvement in their films if some of the
American methods were copied. It is the
latter’s custom to secure the presence of the
author throughout the whole period of production,
and his critical judgment and suggestions
ensure the exact reproduction of the film
as written.

All films are not a failure, far from it.
Several British films have been excellently
produced, and the plot has remained as
originally written. This is what the reading
public requires and looks for, especially when
they are familiar with the story. The exact
[104]

reproduction of the plot without alteration
does much to secure the confidence of the
patrons.

At the present time the British film-producers
are handicapped by the American
film-tax, which reduces considerably the scope
of sale, but if only out of fairness to this
country the tax should be dropped—or our
Government must perforce raise a similar
barrier to protect British producers in this
country.

The prospects for British producers are
brighter, and if they can exhibit at the various
“Trade Shows” films worth seeing—from the
standpoint of acting, scenario and production—then
they need not fear a “block” in the
bookings for English films.

The British public is patriotic, and it only
remains for the British producers to bring
out something really good for foreign competition
to fall behind. Our keenest competitors
are America, Germany, Italy and
Switzerland.

[105]

Cinema Eccentricities: Blunders and Inaccuracies.

Some remarkable blunders are perpetrated
in the production of some modern films, either
due to an oversight on the part of the producer
who endeavours to make it too realistic,
or inattention to details. These incidents have
a tendency to do more harm to the cinema
than good, for these little slips which have
been allowed to creep in and appear on the
screen are apt to make the picture patrons
become impatient. Some people find amusement
in the noting of all these blunders. Let
me enumerate a few to show what I mean,
for they are too apparent to escape notice.
For instance—

A monk in a picture of the twelfth century
is seen to switch off the electric light!

Louis the XIVth is supposed to remark to
a lady-in-waiting, that she wants “taking
down a peg,” an expression not quite in keeping
with the period portrayed!

Again, it is just as ridiculous for vaccination
marks to be shown on the left arm of a harem-queen
[106]

of the East—period, a thousand years
ago!

One sees such items as, a view of Curzon
Street, showing huge pillared porticoes and
palms.

A duke who wears appalling American
“reach-me-downs.”

A duchess who is Irish, and therefore must
say “Be jabers” and “Begorra.”

Views of English countryside and ducal
park, displaying granite boulders, tropical
palms and scores of American cars all on the
wrong side of the road!

Another delightful oversight—a man who
enters a strip of undergrowth wearing a tie,
walks straight through and emerges with an
up-to-date West End made-up bow, to the
old miser in “Wuthering Heights”; the
times are Victorian, and a conspicuous object
is a safe made in 1915.

One laughs at the absurdity of the whole
thing, when a lady in a crinoline is shown
knitting a jumper; or a disreputable attic is
furnished with a beautifully carved wooden
bed, fitted with silken hangings.

[107]
Copies of the “Peerage” figure in this
satire—of course it is American—and it is
such instances which are creating a bad name
for the cinema. American ignorance of the
British peerage is shown in the film featuring
an old Warwickshire family, Armitage by
name; a beautiful daughter, the Honourable
Diana Gwen Beaufort, etc., Armitage. Her
young brother remained the plain unvarnished
“Eddie”; her mother “Mrs. Armitage,” and
they were apparently not on the same aristocratic
level as the Hon. Gwen. A framed
copy of the family crest is much to the fore.
It is only too noticeable that the Hon. Gwendoline
is in direct succession to the family
honours, totally excluding her living brother.
In the end this captivating young personage
marries an ordinary American commoner;
the honeymoon is spent at the ancestral home
in Warwickshire—Armitage Castle. How, or
why she got there the film story does not relate.

Such ignorance causes the public to distrust
all films, and does much to lessen the attendance
of intelligent people at the cinema
theatres.

[108]

Natural Colour Films.

Most film pictures shown upon the screen
are at present of the black and white variety,
and colour films are sometimes spoken of as
being generally impracticable. The main item
which is the cause of the non-general appearance
of these films in natural colour is the
question of cost. Experiments have been
highly successful, but the necessary standard
of apparatus has to be secured to produce the
colours of nature in reality, and this is the
reason why natural colour films have been
slow in receiving commercial recognition. The
items entering into consideration are—extra
equipment and extra help.

A colour-film has to be very realistic, and
to secure its real market value its ascendancy
over the ordinary black and white film has to
be proved. If the “projector” required it
to be elaborate, the stage effects to be in unison,
its chances as a commercial venture are greatly
reduced on account of the high cost of film
rental. The various expensive processes of
production have greatly retarded its progress—hence
its rarity.

[109]
Colour films are usually accepted as natural
colour films, whereas, in reality, natural colour
sometimes does not exist. A great number
of these natural colour films are hand painted,
mostly produced in France, where this subtle
art of colour deception is practised to advantage.
Films are tastefully and artistically
coloured, requiring excessive patience and skill
from hundreds of workers; for it is no easy
task to paint these miniatures, measuring one
inch by three-quarters of an inch.

This process of painting is carried out by
stages. One scene is gone through, taking
a single character—a house, background or
foliage in its various shades. The process is
tedious and there lurks the ever-present danger
of making mistakes which would spoil the
whole effect.

Photography plays an important part in
the reproduction in natural colours, and the
fact that dyes and chemicals can be used for
this purpose is overlooked by many people—red,
orange, green, yellow, violet and blue,
when mixed in varying degrees, produce any
shade known to the human eye.

[110]
The earliest attempt at a natural colour
process for the film was made in 1907; the
combined efforts and experiments of an Englishman
and an American. Their efforts were
very successful, the pictures being particularly
clear and realistic. An improved process has
been developed which reproduces objects,
whether stationary or in motion, bringing
forth the natural colours to be found in nature
at her best.

It is to be regretted that the colour films
cannot be cheapened in the process of production,
for nothing delights the hearts of
patrons more than to see before their eyes
scenes and places with which they are familiar;
every object of still life (plants), or the living
animals roaming amidst their natural-coloured
surroundings.

Talking Films.

The talking picture commenced its venture,
fettered. It was introduced to the public
whilst in its infancy; experiments had been
few, hence these two combining factors failed
to work in harmony, and consequently faith
in its future progress was badly shattered.

[111]
The leading difficulty was the question of
synchronising the sound and pictures, for to
speak accurately they must be in perfect
step. The simplest talking film is the combination
of an ordinary phonograph and a
projector. The phonograph placed near the
actors registers the sounds whilst the camera
records the action.

In the question of synchronism lies the
difference of the various schemes promoted
in the past; the two main essentials must
be kept in unison, otherwise the whole thing
becomes a farce. Intricate time-arrangements,
synchronized motors, loud-speaking telephone
arrangements have yielded but poor results.
One attempt was tried whereby the film carried
the sound record along one edge side by side
with the pictures. A stylus is made to travel
in a groove on the film, and apparently
synchronization is complete, but the test
results turned out anything but satisfactory.

For recording sounds or speech, sensitive
microphones are distributed about the scene
where the play is being acted. These microphones
are skilfully concealed, in a fern or
[112]

palm, underneath a desk or table, anywhere
so that it is skilfully camouflaged from the
vision of the actors taking part. The sound waves
impinging on the microphones are
transferred to a circuit including a battery
and a string-galvanometer, highly sensitive;
the string attached to this galvanometer is
hung over a series of very powerful electro-magnets,
and the slightest fluctuations in the
current passing through it causes an immediate
distortion. Powerful arc lamps are mounted
at the rear of the camera and a beam of light
penetrates through the galvanometer, throwing
a shadow of the wire on a steadily moving
film behind a narrow horizontal slip. The
wire is so arranged that one side of the exposed
film is always in the shadow, the developed
film shows a straight edge and a series of
mountain tops, or peaks.

The galvanometer is the heart of the sound
recorder. A single wire was employed in the
earlier forms. An oil bath is provided through
which the upper part of the wire passes, which
damps the movement. This instrument can
be easily opened; provision also being made
[113]

for adjusting the wire best suited for the sound
record.

The reproducing process is easy. A fine
telephonic relay, highly sensitive, is employed
in circuit with the selenium cell and battery,
in addition, a clear-speaking telephone with
its own battery is operated in the secondary
circuit. The second record of the film is
transmitted into sound waves, which are
generated throughout the cinema at the same
time the pictures are being shown on the screen.

Quite recently in London a new process was
shown, comprising a transmitter, electrically
connected by means of an ordinary telephone
wire to the reproducing instruments, which
are placed in the frame of the screen, and a
double turntable carries the musical records,
which are automatically controlled by the
film in such a way that the change from one
record to another is made without pause or
hesitancy, and in absolute conjunction with
the movement of the pictures. An outstanding
feature is that the apparatus can be
easily connected with any existing cinema
projector.

[114]
Speaking-films of short duration are a
great attraction and fairly successful to undertake,
but their real value as an effective
synchronizer would be fairly tested
reel film. The obstacles to be overcome here
would be tremendous; it would mean constant
rehearsing, over and over again, until the
players were absolutely perfect in word as
well as in action, and the excision of any part
of the film would interfere with the reproduction.

Accidents sometimes happen to films, such
as tearing, firing, severe scratching, and this
necessitates the cutting away of part of the
film. This possibility of interruption is minimized
in the new apparatus; the operator can
adjust the gramophone to make allowance
for the cutting off of one or two feet of film,
but not beyond this extent. Lecturers find
the film not altogether satisfactory to aid
them in demonstrating their lectures; the
drawback lies in the fact that he sometimes
wishes to stop the film to emphasize some
particular passages in his lecture, but a new
process has now come to his aid which will
[115]

relieve him of this anxiety. The film is passed
through a water jacket, which is attached to
the projecting machine, and this enables
film to be stopped at any point, for any length
of time. This experiment has been made with
current ranging from 30 to 60 amperes, and
even at 60 it has been found possible to maintain
the film stationary for ten minutes.

Take Professor Stirling’s lecture. A Gallic
cock is thrown upon a screen, life-like in its
pride and colours; it ruffled its feathers and
inflated its gorge, and opened its beak, then
there came forth the most strident and
triumphant cock-crows ever heard at dawn;
and so perfectly did the sounds correspond to
the actions of the bird, that it was almost
impossible to believe that the real bird was
not there.

After experiments extending over ten years,
a Swedish engineer, M. Sven Berglund, has
succeeded in inventing a speaking film, which
ensures the simultaneous production of sound
and action. Upon the heel of this invention
comes another by an Englishman; the perfect
voice-movement film having reached a definite
[116]

advanced stage. The invention of a synchronizer
by Mr. Claude H. Verity, a Harrogate
engineer, enables the operator, by simply sliding
a knob, quite independently of observing the
screen, to work synchronization to 1-24th of
a second. For operas with singing and music,
a child could operate it because there is a fixed
tempo. Should the film break by accident,
the speaking can be shut off and taken up
again. A great advantage of the invention is
that with the apparatus in projecting boxes
the synchronized film could be circulated in
the ordinary way.

Still another invention by an Englishman,
which goes a long way towards the perfection
of these pictures, is one by which the pictures
are made sharper and deeper in tone, besides
being steadier; this is done by a series of
mirrors. It has often been noticed that some
of the pictures when thrown upon the screen
lack “body,” or shall we call it “substance”?
By this means the pictures are made more
realistic than ever; the natural lines on the
human face are visible, so life-like and human
do they appear.

[117]
Screen improvements are also taking place.
The new Ekualite diminishes the amount of
eyestrain, and the front benchers may watch
pictures without that periodical resting from
the concentrated gaze. It ensures perfect
comfort of vision from any angle of a cinema
hall.

It is needless to point out that the extension
of the idea is possible, the application of the
cinematograph and chronophone are illimitable,
and how much more will the Library
lectures and “Half-hour talks” be appreciated!
Hundreds of years hence, our descendants
may see and hear their forefathers
as if their living ghosts talked and walked,
long after their bones have become dust.

Paper Films.

British ingenuity and invention has produced
a further revolution in film production,
reducing cost and minimizing fire risks. The
inventor of this innovation in paper photoplay
is Mr. Martin Harper, of London, who also
has the credit to his name of producing the
“Extralite” flickerless shutter. The commercial
[118]

samples have been described as
“everything the inventor claims for them.”

These paper films will not blacken or singe,
which claim has been proved by subjecting
them to the excessive heat generated by the
projector, and they are absolutely non-inflammable.
There is also an additional value
to these films, when shown on the screen:
they produce wonderful pictures, soft in tone,
with more body than the celluloid films. These
films will withstand wear and tear, the “jumping”
of the film caused by vibration due to a
well-worn film will be eliminated.

Other advantages derived from the appearance
of the paper film are that the cost of
production is claimed to be only one-tenth of the
celluloid film. Lighting cost of projection
is reduced by one-third, and the price of the
projector, which is simple in construction in
comparison with the complicated lens system,
costs considerably less.

The outcome is obvious, and there is every
possibility of the film and the projector being
introduced into the home for amusement and
entertainment during family gatherings at a
[119]

Christmas treat, etc. Some people have
actually had films prepared of the gambols
of their own children, which in later years
will be shown to them as “what they used
to be in childhood.” This idea will undoubtedly
grow now that the paper film has appeared
and proved its durability.

Paper films will affect a whole number of
concerns. Cinema-operating rooms need not
be asbestos-lined to conform with fire-insurance
policies; cost of construction will be easier
and cheaper, and insurance rates will be lower.
The operator also will be relieved of that ceaseless
vigilance so necessary with a celluloid film.

The existing bye-laws now governing film
exhibitions under the Cinematograph Act will
be questioned. This Act only covers celluloid
films; these printed paper slips are neither
films nor celluloid.

All this reduced cost of purchase and maintenance
will commend itself to private enterprises
and manufacturers generally. Greater
possibilities are foreshadowed in being able
to demonstrate the efficiency of their finished
articles.

[120]
The general use of the cinema in the schools
has been “tabooed” in some quarters on
account of the fire possibilities. This difficulty
has now been overcome, so that one
may see in the near future this voiceless
teacher working and instructing the scholars.

Much more could have been said dealing
with technicalities—such as the construction
of the camera, editing, acting, trick photography
and supposed realities; spirit photographs,
cartoons becoming animated with
life, and moving sculpture—but these must be
left to the imaginative mind of the critic.

[121]

VII

CONCLUSION

Upon reflection, the effect produced by the
cinematograph upon our lives and thoughts,
nay, upon the nation as a whole, must be
considerable—morally, physically, spiritually,
mentally and psychologically, for this form of
amusement absorbs part of the daily thoughts
of a considerable percentage of the British
public. The reaction upon the mind becomes
apparent from the quality of the subject-matter
shown. There are certain members
of the community who stand apart from this
form of occupation of their leisure moments.
This lack of moral courage, of the possibility
of becoming tainted with the lower tone of
some of the pictures, is to be deplored. Let
social workers and educationists view the
films and judge for themselves; and decry
those films which, in their opinion, are unfit
for mental consumption.

[122]
The greatest service can be rendered to
humanity if the cinematograph be used in the
right direction. There is a crying need for
more educational films. This progression is
retarded because production, at the present
time, is centralized. This centralization, as
we all well know, takes place in America, but
before long there will be a breakaway, and
British producers will think for themselves
and not be influenced by Americanism.

The population of England and America
is widely different. The American population
is self-supporting, providing vast fields for
opportunities, and these opportunities are
considerably helped by prevailing climatic
conditions. In England, production is
periodical, governed by climatic conditions;
in America, in California, the weather conditions
are ideal and consistent. The two
governing factors are at hand—financial support,
and the weather.

British productions have soared above the
fourth-raters, and the standard has undoubtedly
risen during the last few years.
The recent cry of one British Colony to the
[123]

producers in this country was—“Send us
more British films.”

As stated before, and voiced by the powerful
press, a more discriminating censorship is
required. If these duties were carried out
more rigidly by an authorised person capable
of giving an unbiassed judgment, not only
on questionable films, but from the standpoint
of national character, such discretion
would exercise the necessary restraining guidance.

The Government subsidizes the dye industry,
and why should not the educational
side of the film industry receive the same
consideration? This would produce “standardized
educational films,” and might lead
to good results.

The cinema question is uppermost in the
mind of the public, and every phase is looked
to with interest, every new invention eagerly
investigated, and every suggestion for the
raising of the masses, both morally and mentally,
is given a whole-hearted support. It
is hoped that although there may be passages
[124]

in this volume with which readers will not
“see eye to eye,” these pages will have been
read with interest; and will help educationists
to realize more fully the great power that the
film may become in the education of the
people.

THE LONDON AND NORWICH PRESS, LIMITED, LONDON AND NORWICH, ENGLAND

“LIBRARY ADVERTISING”

By
Walter A. Briscoe
(Grafton & Co.).

Some excerpts from Press notices are appended:

GENERAL NOTICES.

“Public Libraries and their uses certainly
need to be forced on the attention
of the public a great deal more than they
are, and these very practical chapters on
methods of advertisement by the Nottingham
City Librarian ought to be of great
service. Posters, articles, leaflets, pamphlets,
announcements thrown on the
Cinema screen, and other methods are
discussed with many facsimile examples
and designs, specimen paragraphs and
articles, etc.”—
Times Literary Supplement.

“‘Publicity is the best policy,’ says
Mr. Walter A. Briscoe in his book entitled
‘Library Advertising,’ a work designed to
advance the Library Movement by every
means possible. Sections deal with
Publicity methods for Public Libraries,
Rural library schemes, Library work with
children, the Cinema and Library, etc.,
and the author discusses the problem of
bringing home to the public the need for
an efficient Library Service from an entirely
new standpoint.”—
The Publishers’
Circular.

“I am inclined to think that Mr. Walter
A. Briscoe is right in holding that the best
and fullest use is not made of such institutions,
because ‘the people have not yet
acquired the idea of thinking
big
about
libraries—and until the populace get the
Library idea progress cannot be spelt with
a capital P.’ Mr. Briscoe suggests the
remedy for this in ‘Library Advertising’:
‘We must proclaim our libraries from the
hills, so to speak,’ he writes, ‘from the
advertisement hoardings, if necessary.
These may be new ideas not acceptable to
the conservative mind. Obscurantist
methods are out of date, however.’ And
so he offers specimens of posters, hints for
‘publicity’ campaigns, etc. Hitherto, I
am afraid, Mr. Carnegie and Sir Henry
Tate have become better known and
appreciated than the libraries they
founded, but Mr. Briscoe’s plans would
certainly do something to alter this....”—
The
Westminster Gazette.

PROFESSIONAL PAPERS.

“This timely volume has for its motto:
‘We often refer to the Public Library
Movement. Let us therefore
MOVE
.’ Mr.
Briscoe designs the book to furnish suggestions
to his readers, most of whom must
be half convinced of the necessity for this
propaganda which is here so stoutly
advocated. The stimulating powers of
this work should be great; every activity
of the ordinary man furnishes an excuse
for reminding him that there is a book in
the public library about it. The volume
is dedicated to the President of the
Library Association, who says: ‘I have
no doubt at all that the book will fill a
very useful function in the work of public
libraries.’ We also learn that French
libraries are preparing for a public discussion
of the book, a very gratifying
tribute to its ‘stimulating’ properties.”—
Library
Association Record.

“The comprehensive title of this book
by the fertile and vigorous chief librarian
of Nottingham is almost sufficiently descriptive
of its contents. For many years
past Mr. Briscoe has advocated advertisement
on a bold and persistent scale, and
in his book proceeds to show us methods
of locomotion which I believe will be
suggestive to most librarians. As a fervent
believer in the necessity for wide and
persistent advertising for libraries, I
recommend this book to my fellow-librarians.
They ought to read it.”—
The
Library World.

“We are convinced that in advertising
is to be found the future success of public
libraries. Nowhere are libraries used as
they should be and in very few places their
value and uses appreciated as they might
be. Mr. Briscoe has dealt with one of the
two classes of library advertising, and has
dealt with it in a practical manner. The
book is full of hints and suggestions for
the librarian, who must necessarily be his
own publicity agent. We heartily congratulate
Mr. Briscoe on what he has
done....”—
The Librarian.

“LIBRARY ADVERTISING,” Grafton & Co., 7s. 6d.

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FILM: ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at
www.gutenberg.org
. If you
are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit
www.gutenberg.org/donate
.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility:
www.gutenberg.org
.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.