The Project Gutenberg eBook, Dreams, Waking Thoughts, and Incidents, by
William Beckford, Edited by G. T. Bettany

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Dreams, Waking Thoughts, and Incidents

Author: William Beckford

Editor: G. T. Bettany

Release Date: May 6, 2015  [eBook #7258]
[This file was first posted on April 2, 2003]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DREAMS, WAKING THOUGHTS, AND
INCIDENTS***

Transcribed from the 1891 Ward, Lock and Co. edition by David
Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org

DREAMS,

WAKING THOUGHTS,

AND

INCIDENTS;

IN A

SERIES OF LETTERS

FROM

VARIOUS PARTS OF EUROPE.

LETTER I.

June
19
th
, 1780.—Shall I tell you my
dreams?—To give an account of my time is doing, I assure
you, but little better.  Never did there exist a more ideal
being.  A frequent mist hovers before my eyes, and, through
its medium, I see objects so faint and hazy, that both their
colours and forms are apt to delude me.  This is a rare
confession, say the wise, for a traveller to make: pretty
accounts will such a one give of outlandish countries: his
correspondents must reap great benefit, no doubt, from such
purblind observations.  But stop, my good friends; patience
a moment!—I really have not the vanity of pretending to
make a single remark, during the whole of my journey: if —
be contented with my visionary way of gazing, I am perfectly
pleased; and shall write away as freely as Mr. A., Mr. B., Mr.
C., and a million others whose letters are the admiration of the
politest circles.

All through Kent did I doze as usual; now and then I opened my
eyes to take in an idea or two of the green, woody country
through which I was passing; then closed them again; transported
myself back to my native hills; thought I led a choir of those I
loved best through their shades; and was happy in the arms of
illusion.  The sun set before I recovered my senses enough
to discover plainly the variegated slopes near Canterbury, waving
with slender birch-trees, and gilt with a profusion of
broom.  I thought myself still in my beloved solitude, but
missed the companions of my slumbers.  Where are
they?—Behind yon blue hills, perhaps, or t’other side
of that thick forest.  My fancy was travelling after these
deserters, till we reached the town; vile enough o’
conscience, and fit only to be passed in one’s sleep.
The moment after I got out of the carriage, brought me to the
cathedral; an old haunt of mine.  I had always venerated its
lofty pillars, dim aisles, and mysterious arches.  Last
night they were more solemn than ever, and echoed no other sound
than my steps.  I strayed about the choir and chapels, till
they grew so dark and dismal, that I was half inclined to be
frightened; looked over my shoulder; thought of spectres that
have an awkward trick of syllabling men’s names in dreary
places; and fancied a sepulchral voice exclaiming: “Worship
my toe at Ghent; my ribs at Florence; my skull at Bologna,
Sienna, and Rome.  Beware how you neglect this order; for my
bones, as well as my spirit, have the miraculous property of
being here, there, and everywhere.”  These
injunctions, you may suppose, were received in a becoming manner,
and noted all down in my pocket-book by inspiration (for I could
not see), and hurrying into the open air, I was whirled away in
the dark to Margate.  Don’t ask what were my dreams
thither:—nothing but horrors, deep-vaulted tombs, and pale,
though lovely figures, extended upon them; shrill blasts that
sung in my ears, and filled me with sadness, and the recollection
of happy hours, fleeting away, perhaps for ever!  I was not
sorry, when the bustle of our coming-in dispelled these
phantoms.  The change, however, in point of scenery was not
calculated to dissipate my gloom; for the first object in this
world that presented itself, was a vast expanse of sea, just
visible by the gleamings of the moon, bathed in watery clouds; a
chill air ruffled the waves.  I went to shiver a few
melancholy moments on the shore.  How often did I try to
wish away the reality of my separation from those I love, and
attempt to persuade myself it was but a dream!

This morning I found myself more cheerfully disposed, by the
queer Dutch faces with short pipes and ginger-bread complexions
that came smirking and scraping to get us on board their
respective vessels; but, as I had a ship engaged for me before,
their invitations were all in vain.  The wind blows fair;
and, should it continue of the same mind a few hours longer, we
shall have no cause to complain of our passage.
Adieu!  Think of me sometimes.  If you write
immediately, I shall receive your letter at the Hague.

It is a bright sunny evening: the sea reflects a thousand
glowing colours, and, in a minute or two, I shall be gliding on
its surface.

LETTER II.

Ostend
,

June
21
st
.

T’other minute I was in Greece, gathering the bloom of
Hymettus, but now I am landed in Flanders, smoked with tobacco,
and half poisoned with garlic.  Were I to remain ten days at
Ostend, I should scarcely have one delightful vision; ’tis
so unclassic a place—nothing but preposterous Flemish roofs
disgust your eyes when you cast them upwards; swaggering Dutchmen
and mongrel barbers are the principal objects they meet with
below.  I should esteem myself in luck, were the nuisances
of this seaport confined only to two senses; but, alas! the
apartment above my head proves a squalling brattery, and the
sounds which proceed from it are so loud and frequent, that a
person might think himself in limbo, without any
extravagance.

Am I not an object of pity, when I tell you that I was
tormented yesterday by a similar cause?  But I know not how
it is; your violent complainers are the least apt to excite
compassion.  I believe, notwithstanding, if another rising
generation should lodge above me at the next inn, I shall grow as
scurrilous as Dr. Smollett, and be dignified with the appellation
of the Younger Smelfungus.  Well, let those make out my
diploma that will, I am determined to vent my spleen, and like
Lucifer, unable to enjoy comfort myself, tease others with the
details of my vexatious.  You must know, then, since I am
resolved to grumble, that, tired with my passage, I went to the
Capuchin church, a large solemn building, in search of silence
and solitude; but here again was I disappointed.
Half-a-dozen squeaking fiddles fugued and flourished away in the
galleries, and as many paralytic monks gabbled before the altars,
while a whole posse of devotees, in long white hoods and
flannels, were sweltering on either side.

Such piety, in warm weather, was no very fragrant
circumstance; so I sought the open air again as fast as I was
able.  The serenity of the evening, joined to the desire I
had of casting another glance over the ocean, tempted me to the
ramparts.  There, at least, thought I to myself, I may range
undisturbed, and talk with my old friends the breezes, and
address my discourse to the waves, and be as romantic and
whimsical as I please; but it happened that I had scarcely begun
my apostrophe, before out flaunted a whole rank of officers, with
ladies and abbés and puppy dogs, singing, and flirting,
and making such a hubbub, that I had not one peaceful moment to
observe the bright tints of the western horizon, or enjoy the
series of antique ideas with which a calm sunset never fails to
inspire me.

Finding, therefore, no quiet abroad, I returned to my inn, and
should have gone immediately to bed, in hopes of relapsing into
the bosom of dreams and delusions; but the limbo I mentioned
before grew so very outrageous, that I was obliged to postpone my
rest till sugar-plums and nursery eloquence had hushed it to
repose.  At length peace was restored, and about eleven
o’clock I fell into a slumber, during which the most lovely
Sicilian prospects filled the eye of my fancy.  I
anticipated the classic scenes of that famous island, and forgot
every sorrow in the meadows of Enna.

Next morning, awakened by the sunbeams, I arose quite
refreshed by the agreeable impressions of my dream, and filled
with presages of future happiness in the climes which had
inspired them.  No other idea but such as Trinacria and
Naples suggested, haunted me whilst travelling to Ghent.  I
neither heard the vile Flemish dialect which was talking around
me, nor noticed formal avenues and marshy country which we
passed.  When we stopped to change horses, I closed my eyes
upon the whole scene, and was transported immediately to some
Grecian solitude, where Theocritus and his shepherds were filling
the air with melody.  To one so far gone in poetic
antiquity, Ghent is not the most likely place to recall his
attention; and I know nothing more about it, than that it is a
large, ill-paved, dismal-looking city, with a decent proportion
of convents and chapels, stuffed with monuments, brazen gates,
and glittering marbles.  In the great church were two or
three pictures by Rubens, mechanically excellent, but these
realities were not designed in so graceful a manner as to divert
my attention from the mere descriptions Pausanias gives us of the
works of Grecian artists, and I would at any time fall asleep in
a Flemish cathedral, for a vision of the temple of Olympian
Jupiter.  But I think I hear, at this moment, some grave and
respectable personage chiding me for such levities, and saying,
“Really, Sir, you had better stay at home, and dream in
your great chair, than give yourself the trouble of going post
through Europe, in search of inspiring places to fall
asleep.  If Flanders and Holland are to be dreamed over at
this rate, you had better take ship at once, and doze all the way
to Italy.”  Upon my word, I should not have much
objection to that scheme; and, if some cabalist would but
transport me in an instant to the summit of Ætna, any body
might slop through the Low Countries that pleased.

Being, however, so far advanced, there was no retracting; and
as it is now three or four years since I have almost abandoned
the hopes of discovering a necromancer, I resolved to journey
along with Quiet and Content for my companions.  These two
comfortable deities have, I believe, taken Flanders under their
especial protection; every step one advances discovering some new
proof of their influence.  The neatness of the houses, and
the universal cleanliness of the villages, show plainly that
their inhabitants live in ease and good humour.  All is
still and peaceful in these fertile lowlands: the eye meets
nothing but round, unmeaning faces at every door, and harmless
stupidity smiling at every window.  The beasts, as placid as
their masters, graze on without any disturbance; and I scarcely
recollect to have heard one grunting swine or snarling mastiff
during my whole progress.  Before every village is a wealthy
dunghill, not at all offensive, because but seldom disturbed; and
there they bask in the sun, and wallow at their ease, till the
hour of death and bacon arrives, when capacious paunches await
them.  If I may judge from the healthy looks and reposed
complexions of the Flemings, they have every reason to expect a
peaceful tomb.

But it is high time to leave our swinish moralities behind us,
and to jog on towards Antwerp.  More rich pastures, more
ample fields of grain, more flourishing willows!—a
boundless plain before this city, dotted with cows and flowers,
from whence its spires and quaint roofs are seen to
advantage.  The pale colours of the sky, and a few gleams of
watery sunshine, gave a true Flemish cast to the scenery, and
everything appeared so consistent, that I had not a shadow of
pretence to think myself asleep.

After crossing a broad, noble river, edged on one side by beds
of osiers beautifully green, and on the other by gates and
turrets preposterously ugly, we came through several streets of
lofty houses to our inn.  Its situation in the “Place
de Mer,” a vast open space surrounded by buildings above
buildings, and roof above roof, has something striking and
singular.  A tall gilt crucifix of bronze, sculptured by
some famous artist, adds to its splendour; and the tops of some
tufted trees, seen above a line of magnificent hotels, have no
bad effect in the perspective.

It was almost dusk when we arrived; and as I am very partial
to new objects discovered by this dubious visionary light, I went
immediately a-rambling.  Not a sound disturbed my
meditations; there were no groups of squabbling children or
talkative old women.  The whole town seemed retired into
their inmost chambers; and I kept winding and turning about, from
street to street, and from alley to alley, without meeting a
single inhabitant.  Now and then, indeed, one or two women
in long cloaks and mantles glided about at a distance; but their
dress was so shroud-like, and their whole appearance so ghostly,
that I was more than half afraid to accost them.  As the
night approached, the ranges of buildings grew more and more dim,
and the silence which reigned amongst them more awful.  The
canals, which in some places intersect the streets, were likewise
in perfect solitude, and there was just light sufficient for me
to observe on the still waters the reflection of the structures
above them.  Except two or three tapers glimmering through
the casements, no one circumstance indicated human
existence.  I might, without being thought very romantic,
have imagined myself in the city of petrified people, which
Arabian fabulists are so fond of describing.  Were any one
to ask my advice upon the subject of retirement, I should tell
him,—By all means repair to Antwerp.  No village
amongst the Alps, or hermitage upon Mount Lebanon, is less
disturbed: you may pass your days in this great city without
being the least conscious of its sixty thousand inhabitants,
unless you visit the churches.  There, indeed, are to be
heard a few devout whispers, and sometimes, to be sure, the bells
make a little chiming; but walk about, as I do, in the twilights
of midsummer, and be assured your ears will be free from all
molestation.

You can have no idea how many strange, amusing fancies played
around me whilst I wandered along; nor how delighted I was with
the novelty of my situation.  But a few days ago, thought I
within myself, I was in the midst of all the tumult and uproar of
London: now, as if by some magic influence, I am transported to a
city equally remarkable for streets and edifices, but whose
inhabitants seem cast into a profound repose.  What a pity
that we cannot borrow some small share of this soporific
disposition!  It would temper that restless spirit which
throws us sometimes into such dreadful convulsions.
However, let us not be too precipitate in desiring so dead a
calm; the time may arrive when, like Antwerp, we may sink into
the arms of forgetfulness; when a fine verdure may carpet our
Exchange, and passengers traverse the Strand, without any danger
of being smothered in crowds, or lost in the confusion of
carriages.

Reflecting, in this manner, upon the silence of the place,
contrasted with the important bustle which formerly rendered it
so famous, I insensibly drew near to the cathedral, and found
myself, before I was aware, under its stupendous tower.  It
is difficult to conceive an object more solemn or imposing than
this edifice at the hour I first beheld it.  Dark shades
hindered my examining the lower galleries or windows; their
elaborate carved work was invisible; nothing but huge masses of
building met my sight, and the tower, shooting up four hundred
and sixty-six feet into the air, received an additional
importance from the gloom which prevailed below.  The sky
being perfectly clear, several stars twinkled through the mosaic
of the spire, and added not a little to its enchanted
effect.  I longed to ascend it that instant, to stretch
myself out upon its very summit, and calculate from so sublime an
elevation the influence of the planets.

Whilst I was indulging my astrological reveries, a ponderous
bell struck ten, and such a peal of chimes succeeded, as shook
the whole edifice, notwithstanding its bulk, and drove me away in
a hurry.  No mob obstructed my passage, and I ran through a
succession of streets, free and unmolested, as if I had been
skimming along over the downs of Wiltshire.  My servants
conversing before the hotel were the only sounds which the great
“Place de Mer” echoed.

This universal stillness was the more pleasing, when I looked
back upon those scenes of horror and outcry which filled London
but a week or two ago, when danger was not confined to night
only, and the environs of the capital, but haunted our streets at
midday.  Here, I could wander over an entire city; stray by
the port, and venture through the most obscure alleys, without a
single apprehension; without beholding a sky red and portentous
with the light of fires, or hearing the confused and terrifying
murmurs of shouts and groans, mingled with the reports of
artillery.  I can assure you, I think myself very fortunate
to have escaped the possibility of another such week of
desolation, and to be peaceably roosted at Antwerp.  Were I
not still fatigued with my heavy progress through sands and
quagmires, I should descant a little longer upon the blessings of
so quiet a metropolis, but it is growing late, and I must retire
to enjoy it.

LETTER III.

Antwerp
,

June
23
rd
.

My windows look full upon the Place de Mer, and the sun,
beaming through their white curtains, awoke me from a dream of
Arabian happiness.  Imagination had procured herself a tent
on the mountains of Sanaa, covered with coffee-trees in
bloom.  She was presenting me the essence of their flowers,
and was just telling me that you possessed a pavilion on a
neighbouring hill, when the sunshine dispelled the vision; and
opening my eyes, I found myself pent in by Flemish spires and
buildings: no hills, no verdure, no aromatic breezes, no hope of
being in your vicinity: all were vanished with the shadows of
fancy, and I was left alone to deplore your absence.  But I
think it rather selfish to wish you here, for what pleasure could
pacing from one dull church to another, afford a person of your
turn?  I don’t believe you would catch a taste for
blubbering Magdalens and coarse Madonnas, by lolling in
Rubens’ chair; nor do I believe a view of the Ostades and
Snyders, so liberally scattered in every collection, would
greatly improve your pencil.

After breakfast this morning I began my pilgrimage to all
those illustrious cabinets.  First, I went to Monsieur Van
Lencren’s, who possesses a suite of apartments, lined, from
the base to the cornice, with the rarest productions of the
Flemish school.  Heavens forbid I should enter into a detail
of their niceties!  I might as well count the dew-drops upon
any of Van Huysem’s flower-pieces, or the pimples on their
possessor’s countenance; a very good sort of man, indeed;
but from whom I was not at all sorry to be delivered.

My joy was, however, of short duration, as a few minutes
brought me into the courtyard of the Chanoin Knyfe’s
habitation; a snug abode, well furnished with easy chairs and
orthodox couches.  After viewing the rooms on the first
floor, we mounted a gentle staircase, and entered an
ante-chamber, which those who delight in the imitations of art
rather than of nature, in the likenesses of joint stools and the
portraits of tankards, would esteem most capitally adorned: but
it must be confessed, that, amongst these uninteresting
performances, are dispersed a few striking Berghems and agreeable
Polemburgs.  In the gallery adjoining, two or three Rosa de
Tivolis merit observation; and a large Teniers, representing a
St. Anthony surrounded by a malicious fry of imps and leering
devilesses, is well calculated to display the whimsical
buffoonery of a Dutch imagination.

I was observing this strange medley, when the Canon made his
appearance; and a most prepossessing figure he has, according to
Flemish ideas.  In my humble opinion his Reverence looked a
little muddled or so; and, to be sure, the description I
afterwards heard of his style of living, favours not a little my
surmises.  This worthy dignitary, what with his private
fortune and the good things of the church, enjoys a revenue of
about five thousand pounds sterling, which he contrives to get
rid of in the joys of the table and the encouragement of the
pencil.

His servants, perhaps, assist not a little in the expenditure
of so comfortable an income; the Canon being upon a very social
footing with them all.  At four o’clock in the
afternoon, a select party attend him in his coach to an alehouse
about a league from the city; where a table, well spread with
jugs of beer and handsome cheeses, waits their arrival.
After enjoying this rural fare, the same equipage conducts them
back again, by all accounts, much faster than they came; which
may well be conceived, as the coachman is one of the brightest
wits of the entertainment.

My compliments, alas! were not much relished, you may suppose,
by this jovial personage.  I said a few favourable words of
Polemburg, and offered up a small tribute of praise to the memory
of Berghem; but, as I could not prevail upon Mynheer Knyfe to
expand, I made one of my best bows, and left him to the enjoyment
of his domestic felicity.

In my way home, I looked into another cabinet, the greatest
ornament of which was a most sublime thistle by Snyders, of the
heroic size, and so faithfully imitated that I dare say no ass
could see it unmoved.  At length, it was lawful to return
home; and as I positively refused visiting any more cabinets in
the afternoon, I sent for a harpsichord of Rucker, and played
myself quite out of the Netherlands.

It was late before I finished my musical excursion, and I took
advantage of this dusky moment to revisit the cathedral.  A
flight of starlings was fluttering about one of the pinnacles of
the tower; their faint chirpings were the only sounds that broke
the stillness of the air.  Not a human form appeared at any
of the windows around; no footsteps were audible in the opening
before the grand entrance; and, during the half hour I spent in
walking to and fro beneath the spire, one solitary Franciscan was
the only creature that accosted me.  From him I learnt that
a grand service was to be performed next day in honour of St.
John the Baptist, and the best music in Flanders would be called
forth on the occasion.  As I had seen cabinets enough to
form some slight judgment of Flemish painting, I determined to
stay one day longer at Antwerp to hear a little how its
inhabitants were disposed to harmony.

Having taken this resolution, I formed an acquaintance with
Mynheer Vander Bosch, the first organist of the place, who very
kindly permitted me to sit next him in his gallery during the
celebration of high mass.  The service ended, I strayed
about the aisles, and examined the innumerable chapels which
decorate them, whilst Mynheer Vander Bosch thundered and
lightened away upon his huge organ with fifty stops.

When the first flashes of execution were a little subsided, I
took an opportunity of surveying the celebrated “Descent
from the Cross,” which has ever been esteemed one of
Rubens’s chef d’œuvres, and for which they say
old Lewis Baboon offered no less a sum than forty thousand
florins.  The principal figure has, doubtless, a very
meritorious paleness, and looks as dead as an artist could
desire; the rest of the group have been so liberally praised,
that there is no occasion to add another tittle of
commendation.  A swinging St. Christopher, fording a brook
with a child on his shoulders, cannot fail of attracting your
attention.  This colossal personage is painted on the
folding-doors which defend the capital performance just mentioned
from vulgar eyes; and here Rubens has selected a very proper
subject to display the gigantic coarseness of his pencil.

Had this powerful artist confined his strength to the
representation of agonizing thieves and sturdy Barabbases, nobody
would have been readier than your humble servant to offer incense
at his shrine, but when I find him lost in the flounces of the
Virgin’s drapery, or bewildered in the graces of St.
Catherine’s smile, pardon me if I withhold my
adoration.  After I had most dutifully observed all the
Rubenses in the church, I walked half over Antwerp in search of
St. John’s relics, which were moving about in procession,
but an heretical wind having extinguished all their tapers, and
discomposed the canopy over the Bon Dieu, I cannot say much for
the grandeur of the spectacle.  If my eyes were not greatly
regaled by the Saint’s magnificence, my ears were greatly
affected in the evening by the music which sang forth his
praises.  The cathedral was crowded with devotees and
perfumed with incense.  Several of its marble altars gleamed
with the reflection of lamps, and, altogether, the spectacle was
new and imposing.  I knelt very piously in one of the aisles
while a symphony in the best style of Corelli, performed with
taste and feeling, transported me to Italian climates, and I was
quite vexed, when a cessation dissolved the charm, to think that
I had still so many tramontane regions to pass, before I could in
effect reach that classic country, where my spirit had so long
taken up its abode.  Finding it was in vain to wish or
expect any preternatural interposition, and perceiving no
conscious angel, or Loretto-vehicle, waiting in some dark
consecrated corner to bear me away, I humbly returned to my hotel
in the Place de Mer, and soothed myself with some terrestrial
harmony; till, my eyes growing heavy, I fell fast asleep, and
entered the empire of dreams, according to custom, by its ivory
portal.  What passed in those shadowy realms is too thin and
unsubstantial to be committed to paper.  The very breath of
waking mortals would dissipate all the train, and drive them
eternally away; give me leave, therefore, to omit the relation of
my visionary travels, and have the patience to pursue a sketch of
my real ones from Antwerp to the Hague.

Monday
,
June
26
th
, we were again upon the
pavé, rattling and jumbling along between clipped hedges
and blighted avenues.  The plagues of Egypt have been
renewed, one might almost imagine, in this country, by the
appearance of the oak-trees: not a leaf have the insects
spared.  After having had the displeasure of seeing no other
objects for several hours, but these blasted rows, the scene
changed to vast tracts of level country, buried in sand, and
smothered with heath; the particular character of which I had but
too good an opportunity of intimately knowing, as a tortoise
might have kept pace with us without being once out of
breath.

Towards evening, we entered the dominions of the United
Provinces, and had all their glory of canals, track-shuyts, and
windmills before us.  The minute neatness of the villages,
their red roofs, and the lively green of the willows which shade
them, corresponded with the ideas I had formed of Chinese
prospects; a resemblance which was not diminished upon viewing on
every side the level scenery of enamelled meadows, with stripes
of clear water across them, and innumerable barges gliding busily
along.  Nothing could be finer than the weather; it improved
each moment, as if propitious to my exotic fancies; and, at
sunset, not one single cloud obscured the horizon.  Several
storks were parading by the water-side, amongst flags and osiers;
and, as far as the eye could reach, large herds of beautifully
spotted cattle were enjoying the plenty of their pastures.
I was perfectly in the environs of Canton, or Ning Po, till we
reached Meerdyke.  You know fumigations are always the
current recipe in romance to break an enchantment; as soon,
therefore, as I left my carriage, and entered my inn, the clouds
of tobacco which filled every one of its apartments dispersed my
Chinese imaginations, and reduced me in an instant to
Holland.

Why should I enlarge upon my adventures at Meerdyke?  To
tell you that its inhabitants are the most uncouth bipeds in the
universe would be nothing very new or entertaining; so let me at
once pass over the village, leave Rotterdam, and even Delft, that
great parent of pottery, and transport you with a wave of my pen
to the Hague.

As the evening was rather warm, I immediately walked out to
enjoy the shade of the long avenue which leads to
Scheveling.  It was fresh and pleasant enough, but I
breathed none of those genuine woody perfumes, which exhale from
the depths of forests, and which allure my imagination at once to
the haunts of Pan and the good old Sylvanus.  However, I was
far from displeased with my ramble; and, consoling myself with
the hopes of shortly reposing in the sylvan labyrinths of Nemi, I
proceeded to the village on the sea-coast, which terminates the
perspective.  Almost every cottage door being open to catch
the air, I had an opportunity of looking into their neat
apartments.  Tables, shelves, earthenware, all glisten with
cleanliness; the country people were drinking tea, after the
fatigues of the day, and talking over its bargains and
contrivances.

I left them, to walk on the beach, and was so charmed with the
vast azure expanse of ocean, which opened suddenly upon me, that
I remained there a full half hour.  More than two hundred
vessels of different sizes were in sight, the last sunbeams
purpling their sails, and casting a path of innumerable
brilliants athwart the waves.  What would I not have given
to follow this shining track!  It might have conducted me
straight to those fortunate western climates, those happy isles
which you are so fond of painting, and I of dreaming about.
But, unluckily, this passage was the only one my neighbours the
Dutch were ignorant of.  To be sure they have islands rich
in spices, and blessed with the sun’s particular attention,
but which their government, I am apt to imagine, renders by no
means fortunate.

Abandoning therefore all hopes at present of this adventurous
voyage, I returned towards the Hague, and, in my way home, looked
into a country-house of the late Count Bentinck, with parterres
and bosquets by no means resembling (one should conjecture) the
gardens of the Hesperides.  But, considering that the whole
group of trees, terraces, and verdure were in a manner created
out of hills of sand, the place may claim some portion of
merit.  The walks and alleys have all the stiffness and
formality our ancestors admired; but the intermediate spaces,
being dotted with clumps and sprinkled with flowers, are imagined
in Holland to be in the English style.  An Englishman ought
certainly to behold it with partial eyes, since every possible
attempt has been made to twist it into the taste of his
country.

I need not say how liberally I bestowed my encomiums on Count
B.’s tasteful intentions; nor how happy I was, when I had
duly serpentized over his garden, to find myself once more in the
grand avenue.  All the way home, I reflected upon the
economical disposition of the Dutch, who raise gardens from heaps
of sand, and cities out of the bosom of the waters.  I had
still a further proof of this thrifty turn, since the first
object I met was an unwieldy fellow (not able, or unwilling,
perhaps, to afford horses) airing his carcass in a one-dog
chair.  The poor animal puffed and panted,—Mynheer
smoked, and gaped around him with the most blessed
indifference.

LETTER IV.

June
30
th
.

I dedicated the morning to the Prince of Orange’s
cabinet of paintings and curiosities both natural and
artificial.  Amongst the pictures which amused me the most
is a St. Anthony, by Hell-fire Brughel, who has shown himself
right worthy of the title; for a more diabolical variety of imps
never entered the human imagination.  Brughel has made his
saint take refuge in a ditch filled with harpies and creeping
things innumerable, whose malice, one should think, would have
lost Job himself the reputation of patience.  Castles of
steel and fiery turrets glare on every side, from whence issue a
band of junior devils.  These seem highly entertained with
pinking poor St. Anthony, and whispering, I warrant ye, filthy
tales in his ear.  Nothing can be more rueful than the
patient’s countenance; more forlorn than his beard; more
pious than his eye, which forms a strong contrast to the pert
winks and insidious glances of his persecutors; some of whom; I
need not mention, are evidently of the female kind.

But really I am quite ashamed of having detained you in such
bad company so long; and, had I a moment to spare, you should be
introduced to a better set in this gallery, where some of the
most exquisite Berghems and Wouvermans I ever beheld would
delight you for hours.  I do not think you would look much
at the Polemburgs; there are but two, and one of them is very far
from capital; in short I am in a great hurry; so pardon me, Carlo
Cignani! if I don’t do justice to your merit; and excuse
me, Potter! if I pass by your herds without leaving a tribute of
admiration.

Mynheer Van Something is as eager to precipitate my motions as
I was to get out of the damps and perplexities of Soorflect
yesterday evening; so mounting a very indifferent staircase, he
led me to a suite of garret-like apartments; which, considering
the meanness of their exterior, I was much surprised to find
stored with some of the most valuable productions of the
Indies.  Gold cups enriched with gems, models of Chinese
palaces in ivory, glittering armour of Hindostan, and Japan
caskets, filled every corner of this awkward treasury.  What
of all its baubles pleased me most was a large coffer of some
precious wood, containing enamelled flasks of oriental essences,
enough to perfume a zenana, and so fragrant that I thought the
Mogul himself a Dutchman, for lavishing them upon this inelegant
nation.  If disagreeable fumes, as I mentioned before,
dissolve enchantments, such aromatic oils have doubtless the
power of raising them; for, whilst I scented their fragrance,
scarcely could anything have persuaded me that I was not in the
wardrobe of Hecuba,—

“Where
treasur’d odours breath’d a costly scent.”

I saw, or seemed to see, the arched apartments, the procession
of venerable matrons, the consecrated vestments: the very temple
began to rise upon my sight, when a Dutch porpoise approaching to
make me a low bow; his complaisance was full as notorious as
Satan’s, when, according to Catholic legends, he took leave
of Calvin or Dr. Faustus.  No spell can resist a fumigation
of this nature; away fled palace, Hecuba, matrons, temple,
etc.  I looked up, and lo!  I was in a garret.  As
poetry is but too often connected with this lofty situation, you
won’t wonder much at my flight.  Being a little
recovered from it, I tottered down the staircase, entered the
cabinets of natural history, and was soon restored to my sober
senses.  A grave hippopotamus contributed a great deal to
their reestablishment.

The butterflies, I must needs confess, were very near leading
me another dance: I thought of their native hills and beloved
flowers, of Haynang and Nan-Hoa;
[110]
but the jargon
which was prating all around me prevented the excursion, and I
summoned a decent share of attention for that ample chamber which
has been appropriated to bottled snakes and pickled
fœtuses.

After having enjoyed the same spectacle in the British Museum,
no very new or singular objects can be selected in this.
One of the rarest articles it contains is the representation in
wax of a human head, most dexterously flayed indeed!
Rapturous encomiums have been bestowed by amateurs on this
performance.  A German professor could hardly believe it
artificial; and, prompted by the love of truth, set his teeth in
this delicious morsel to be convinced of its reality.  My
faith was less hazardously established; and I moved off, under
the conviction that art had never produced anything more horridly
natural.

It was one o’clock before I got through the mineral
kingdom; and another hour passed before I could quit with decorum
the regions of stuffed birds and marine productions.  At
length my departure was allowable; and I went to dine at Sir
Joseph Yorke’s, with all nations and languages.  The
Hague is the place in the world for a motley assembly, and, in
some humours, I think such the most agreeable.

After coffee I strayed to the great wood, which, considering
that it almost touches the town with its boughs, is wonderfully
forest-like.  Not a branch being ever permitted to be
lopped, the oaks and beeches retain their natural luxuriance, and
form some of the most picturesque groups conceivable.  In
some places their straight boles rise sixty feet without a bough;
in others, they are bent fantastically over the alleys, which
turn and wind about just as a painter would desire.  I
followed them with eagerness and curiosity, sometimes deviating
from my path amongst tufts of fern and herbage.

In these cool retreats I could not believe myself near canals
and windmills; the Dutch formalities were all forgotten whilst
contemplating the broad masses of foliage above, and the wild
flowers and grasses below.  Several hares and rabbits
scudded by me while I sat; and the birds were chirping their
evening song.  Their preservation does credit to the police
of the country, which is so exact and well regulated as to suffer
no outrage within the precincts of this extensive wood, the depth
and thickness of which seem calculated to favour half the sins of
a capital.

Relying upon this comfortable security, I lingered unmolested
amongst the beeches till the ruddy gold of the setting sun ceased
to glow on their foliage; then taking the nearest path, I
suffered myself, though not without regret, to be conducted out
of this fresh sylvan scene to the dusty, pompous parterres of the
Greffier Fagel.  Every flower that wealth can purchase
diffuses its perfume on one side; whilst every stench a canal can
exhale, poisons the air on the other.  These sluggish
puddles defy all the power of the United Provinces, and retain
the freedom of stinking in spite of their endeavours: but perhaps
I am too bold in my assertion; for I have no authority to mention
any attempts to purify these noxious pools.  Who knows but
their odour is congenial to a Dutch constitution?  One
should be inclined to this supposition by the numerous
banqueting-rooms and pleasure-houses which hang directly above
their surface, and seem calculated on purpose to enjoy
them.  If frogs were not excluded from the magistrature of
their country (and I cannot but think it a little hard that they
are), one should not wonder at this choice.  Such
burgomasters might erect their pavilions in such
situations.  But, after all, I am not greatly surprised at
the fishiness of their site, since very slight authority would
persuade me there was a period when Holland was all water, and
the ancestors of the present inhabitants fish.  A certain
oysterishness of eye and flabbiness of complexion are almost
proofs sufficient of this aquatic descent: and pray tell me for
what purpose are such galligaskins as the Dutch burthen
themselves with contrived, but to tuck up a flouncing tail, and
thus cloak the deformity of their dolphin-like terminations?

Having done penance for some time in the damp alleys which
line the borders of these lazy waters, I was led through
corkscrew sand-walks to a vast flat, sparingly scattered over
with vegetation.  To puzzle myself in such a labyrinth there
was no temptation, so taking advantage of the lateness of the
hour, and muttering a few complimentary promises of returning at
the first opportunity, I escaped the ennui of this endless
scrubbery, and got home, with the determination of being wiser
and less curious if ever my stars should bring me again to the
Hague.  To-morrow I bid it adieu, and if the horses but
second my endeavours, shall be delivered in a few days from the
complicated plagues of the United Provinces.

LETTER V.

Haerlem
,

July
1
st
.

The sky was clear and blue when we left the Hague, and we
travelled along a shady road for about an hour, then down sunk
the carriage into a sand-bed, and we were dragged along so slowly
that I fell into a profound repose.  How long it lasted is
not material; but when I awoke, we were rumbling through
Leyden.  There is no need to write a syllable in honour of
this illustrious city: its praises have already been sung and
said by fifty professors, who have declaimed in its university,
and smoked in its gardens.  So let us get out of it as fast
as we can, and breathe the cool air of the wood near Haerlem,
where we arrived just as day declined.  Hay was making in
the fields, and perfumed the country far and wide with its
reviving fragrance.  I promised myself a pleasant walk in
the groves, took up Gesner, and began to have pretty pastoral
ideas; but when I approached the nymphs that were dispersed on
the meads, and saw faces that would have dishonoured a flounder,
and heard accents that would have confounded a hog, all my
dislike to the walking filth of the Low Countries returned.
I let fall the garlands I had wreathed for the shepherds; we
jumped into the carriage, and were driven off to the town.
Every avenue to it swarmed with people, whose bustle and
agitation seemed to announce that something extraordinary was
going forward.  Upon inquiry I found it was the great fair
at Haerlem; and before we had advanced much farther, our carriage
was surrounded by idlers and gingerbread-eaters of all
denominations.  Passing the gate, we came to a cluster of
little illuminated booths beneath a grove, glittering with toys
and looking-glasses.  It was not without difficulty that we
reached our inn, and then the plague was to procure chambers; at
last we were accommodated, and the first moment I could call my
own has been dedicated to you.

You won’t be surprised at the nonsense I have written,
since I tell you the scene of the riot and uproar from whence it
bears date.  At this very moment the confused murmur of
voices and music stops all regular proceedings: old women and
children tattling; apes, bears, and show-boxes under the windows;
French rattling, English swearing, outrageous Italians, frisking
minstrels;
tambours de basque
at every corner; myself
distracted; a confounded squabble of cooks and haranguing German
couriers just arrived, their masters following open-mouthed;
nothing to eat, the steam of ham and flesh-pots all the while
provoking their appetite; Mynheers very busy with the realities,
and smoking as deliberately as if in a solitary lusthuys over the
laziest canal in the Netherlands; squeaking chambermaids in the
galleries above, and prudish dames below, half inclined to
receive the golden solicitations of certain beauties for
admittance, but positively refusing them the moment some
creditable personage appears; eleven o’clock strikes; half
the lights in the fair are extinguished; scruples grow less and
less delicate; Mammon prevails, darkness and complaisance
succeed.  Good-night; may you sleep better than I shall.

LETTER VI.

Utrecht
,

July
2
nd
.

Well, thank Heaven, Amsterdam is behind us!  How I got
thither signifies not one farthing; it was all along a canal, as
usual.  The weather was hot enough to broil an inhabitant of
Bengal; and the odours, exhaling from every quarter, sufficiently
powerful to regale the nose of a Hottentot.

Under these agreeable circumstances we entered the great
city.  The Stadt-huys being the only cool place it
contained, I repaired thither as fast as the heat permitted, and
walked in a lofty marble hall, magnificently covered, till the
dinner was ready at the inn.  That despatched, we set off
for Utrecht.  Both sides of the way are lined with the
country-houses and gardens of opulent citizens, as fine as gilt
statues and clipped hedges can make them.  Their number is
quite astonishing: from Amsterdam to Utrecht, full thirty miles,
we beheld no other objects than endless avenues and stiff
parterres scrawled and flourished in patterns like the embroidery
of an old maid’s work-bag.  Notwithstanding this
formal taste, I could not help admiring the neatness and
arrangement of every inclosure, enlivened by a profusion of
flowers, and decked with arbours, beneath which a vast number of
round unmeaning faces were solacing themselves after the heat of
the day.  Each lusthuys we passed contained some comfortable
party dozing over their pipes, or angling in the muddy fish-ponds
below.  Scarce an avenue but swarmed with female josses;
little squat pug-dogs waddling at their sides, the attributes, I
suppose, of these fair divinities.

But let us leave them to loiter thus amiably in their Elysian
groves, and arrive at Utrecht; which, as nothing very remarkable
claimed my attention, I hastily quitted to visit a Moravian
establishment at Siest, in its neighbourhood.  The chapel, a
large house, late the habitation of Count Zinzendorf, and a range
of apartments filled with the holy fraternity, are totally
wrapped in dark groves, overgrown with weeds, amongst which some
damsels were straggling, under the immediate protection of their
pious brethren.

Traversing the woods, we found ourselves in a large court,
built round with brick edifices, the grass-plats in a deplorable
way, and one ragged goat, their only inhabitant, on a little
expiatory scheme, perhaps, for the failings of the
fraternity.  I left this poor animal to ruminate in
solitude, and followed my guide into a series of shops furnished
with gew-gaws and trinkets, said to be manufactured by the female
part of the society.  Much cannot be boasted of their
handiworks: I expressed a wish to see some of these industrious
fair ones; but, upon receiving no answer, found this was a
subject
of which there was no discourse
.

Consoling myself as well as I was able, I put myself under the
guidance of another slovenly disciple, who showed me the chapel,
and harangued very pathetically upon celestial love.  In my
way thither, I caught a glimpse of some pretty sempstresses,
warbling melodious hymns as they sat needling and thimbling at
their windows above.  I had a great inclination to have
approached this busy group, but the roll of the brother’s
eye corrected me.

Reflecting upon my unworthiness, I retired from the
consecrated buildings, and was driven back to Utrecht, not a
little amused with my expedition.  If you are as well
disposed to be pleased as I was, I shall esteem myself very
lucky, and not repent sending you so incorrect a narrative.
I really have not time to look it over, and am growing so drowsy,
that you will, I hope, pardon all its errors, when you consider
that my pen writes in its sleep.

LETTER VII.

Spa
,

July
6
th
.

From Utrecht to Bois le Duc nothing but sand and heath; no
inspiration, no whispering foliage, not even a grasshopper, to
put one in mind of Eclogues and Theocritus.  “But why
did you not fall into one of your beloved slumbers, and dream of
poetic mountains?  This was the very country to shut
one’s eyes upon without disparagement.”  Why so
I did, but the postillions and boatmen obliged me to open them,
as soon as they were closed.  Four times was I shoved, out
of my visions, into leaky boats, and towed across as many idle
rivers.  I thought there was no end of these tiresome
transits; and, when I reached my journey’s end, was so
completely jaded that I almost believed Charon would be the next
aquatic I should have to deal with.  The fair light of the
morning (Tuesday, July 4th) was scarcely sufficient to raise my
spirits, and I had left Bois le Duc a good way in arrears before
I was thoroughly convinced of my existence; when I looked through
the blinds of the carriage, and saw nothing but barren plains and
mournful willows, banks clad with rushes, and heifers so black
and dismal that Proserpine herself would have given them up to
Hecate.  I was near believing myself in the neighbourhood of
a certain evil place, where I should be punished for all my
croakings.  We travelled at this rate, I dare say, fifteen
miles, without seeing a single shed: at last, one or two
miserable cottages appeared, darkened by heath, and stuck in a
sand-pit; from whence issued a half-starved generation, that
pursued us a long while with their piteous wailings.  The
heavy roads and ugly prospects, together with the petulant
clamours of my petitioners, made me quite uncharitable.  I
was in a dark, remorseless mood, which lasted me till we reached
Brée, a shabby decayed town, encompassed by walls and
ruined turrets.  Having nothing to do, I straggled about
them, till night shaded the dreary prospects, and gave me an
opportunity of imagining them, if I pleased, noble and
majestic.  Several of these waning edifices were invested
with thick ivy: the evening was chill, and I crept under their
covert.  Two or three brother owls were before me, but
politely gave up their pretensions to the spot, and, as soon as I
appeared, with a rueful whoop flitted away to some deeper
retirement.  I had scarcely begun to mope in tranquillity,
before a rapid shower trickled amongst the clusters above me, and
forced me to abandon my haunt.  Returning in the midst of it
to my inn, I hurried to bed, and was soon lulled asleep by the
storm.  A dream bore me off to Persepolis; and led me
thro’ vast subterraneous treasures to a hall, where
Solomon, methought, was holding forth upon their vanity.  I
was upon the very point of securing a part of this immense
wealth, and fancied myself writing down the sage prophet’s
advice how to make use of it, when a loud vociferation in the
street, and the bell of a neighbouring chapel, dispersed the
vision.  Starting up, I threw open the windows, and found it
was eight o’clock (Wednesday, July 5th), and had hardly
rubbed my eyes, before beggars came limping from every
quarter.  I knew their plaguy voices but too well; and that
the same hubbub had broken my slumbers, and driven me from wisdom
and riches to the regions of ignorance and poverty.  The
halt, the lame, and the blind, being restored, by the miracle of
a few stivers, to their functions, we breakfasted in peace, and,
gaining the carriage, waded through sandy deserts to Maestricht:
our view, however, was considerably improved, for a league round
the town, and presented some hills and pleasant valleys, smiling
with crops of grain: here and there, green meadows, spread over
with hay, varied the prospect, which the chirping of birds (the
first I had heard for many a tedious day) amongst the barley,
rendered so cheerful, that I began, like them, my exultations,
and was equally thoughtless and serene.  I need scarcely
tell you, that, leaving the coach, I pursued a deep furrow
between two extensive corn-fields, and reposed upon a bank of
flowers, the golden ears waving above my head, and entirely
bounding my prospect.  Here I lay, in peace and sunshine, a
few happy moments; contemplating the blue sky, and fancying
myself restored to the valley at F., where I have passed so many
happy hours, shut out from the world, and concealed in the bosom
of harvests.  It was then I first grew so fond of dreaming;
and no wonder, since I have frequently imagined that Ceres did
not disdain to inspire my slumbers; but, half concealed, half
visible, would tell me amusing stories of her reapers; and,
sometimes more seriously inclined, recite the affecting tale of
her misfortunes.  At midday, when all was still, and a warm
haze seemed to repose on the face of the landscape, I have often
fancied this celestial voice bewailing Proserpine, in the most
pathetic accents.  From these sacred moments I resolved to
offer sacrifice in the fields of Enna; to explore their fragrant
recesses, and experience whether the Divinity would not manifest
herself to me in her favourite domain.  It was this vow,
which tempted me from my native valleys.  Its execution,
therefore, being my principal aim, I deserted my solitary bank
and proceeded on my journey.  Maestricht abounds in Gothic
churches, but contains no temple to Ceres.  I was not sorry
to quit it, after spending an hour unavoidably within its
walls.  Our road was conducted up a considerable eminence,
from the summit of which we discovered a range of woody steeps,
extending for leagues; beneath lay a winding valley, richly
variegated and lighted up by the Maese.  The evening sun,
scarcely gleaming through hazy clouds, cast a pale, tender hue
upon the landscape, and the copses, still dewy with a shower that
had lately fallen, diffused the most grateful fragrance.
Flocks of sheep hung browsing on the acclivities, whilst a
numerous herd were dispersed along the river’s side.
I stayed so long, enjoying this pastoral scene, that we did not
arrive at Liège till the night was advanced, and the moon
risen.  Her interesting gleams were thrown away upon this
ill-built, crowded city; and I grieved that gates and
fortifications prevented my breathing the fresh air of the
surrounding mountains.

Next morning (July 6th) a zigzag road brought us, after many
descents and rises, to Spa.  The approach, through a rocky
vale, is not totally devoid of picturesque merit, and as I met no
cabriolets or tituppings on the chaufée, I concluded that
the waters were not as yet much visited; and that I should have
their romantic environs pretty much to myself.  But, alas,
how rudely was I deceived!  The moment we entered up flew a
dozen sashes.  Chevaliers de St. Louis, meagre Marquises,
and ladies of the scarlet order of Babylon, all poked their heads
out.  In a few minutes half the town was in motion; tailors,
confectioners, and barbers thrusting bills into our hands with
manifold grimaces and contortions.  Then succeeded a grand

entré
of
valets de place
, who were hardly
dismissed before the lodging letters arrived, followed by
somebody with a list of
les seigneurs
and
dames
as
long as a Welsh pedigree.  Half-an-hour was wasted in
speeches and recommendations; another passed before we could
snatch a morsel of refreshment; they then finding I was neither
inclined to go to the ball, nor enter the land where Pharaoh
reigneth, peace was restored, a few feeble bows were scraped, and
I found myself in perfect solitude.  Taking advantage of
this quiet moment, I stole out of town, and followed a path cut
in the rocks, which brought me to a young wood of oaks on their
summits.  Luckily I met no saunterer: the gay vagabonds, it
seemed, were all at the assembly, as happy as billiards and
chit-chat could make them.  It was not an evening to tempt
such folks abroad.  The air was cool, and the sky lowering;
a melancholy cloud shaded the wild hills and irregular woods at a
distance.  There was something so importunate in their
appearance, that I could not help asking their name, and was told
they were skirts of the forest of Ardenne, amongst whose
enchanted labyrinths the heroes of Boyardo and Ariosto roved
formerly in quest of adventures.  I felt myself singularly
affected whilst gazing upon a wood so celebrated in romance for
feats of the highest chivalry; and, Don Quixote-like, would have
explored its recesses in search of that memorable fountain of
hatred, which (if you recollect the story) was raised by Merlin
to free illustrious knights and damsels from the torments of
rejected love.  So far was I advanced in these romantic
fancies, that, forgetting the lateness of the hour, I wandered
on, expecting to reach the fountain at every step; but at length
it grew so dusky that, unable to trace back my way amongst the
thickets, in vain I strayed through intricate copses, till the
clouds began to disperse and the moon appeared.  Being so
placed as to receive the full play of silver radiance, to my no
small surprise, I beheld a precipice immediately beneath my
feet.  The chasm was deep and awful; something like the
entrance to a grot discovered itself below, and if I had not
already been disappointed on the score of the fount, I
won’t answer but that I should have flung myself
adventurously down, and tried whether I might not have seen such
wonders as appeared to Bradamante, when cast by Pinnabel, rather
impolitely, into Merlin’s cave.  But no propitious
light beaming from the cavity, I concluded times were changed;
and searching about me, found at last a shelving steep, which it
was just possible to descend without goat’s heels, and
that’s all.

In my way home, I passed the redoute, and seeing a vast glare
of lustres in its apartments, I ran upstairs and found the
gamblers all eager in storming the Pharaoh Bank: a young
Englishman of distinction seemed the most likely to raise the
siege, which increased every instant in turbulence; but not
feeling the least inclination to protract or to shorten its fate,
I left the knights to their adventures, and returned ingloriously
to my inn.

All languages are chattering at the Table d’Hôte,
and all sorts of business transacted under my very windows.
The racket and perfume of this place make me resolve to get out
of it to-morrow; as that is the case, you won’t hear from
me till I reach Munich.  Adieu!  May we meet in our
dreams by the fountain of Merlin, and from thence take our flight
with Astolpho to the moon; for I shrewdly suspect the best part
of our senses are bottled up there; and then, you know, it will
be a delightful novelty to wake up with a clear
understanding.

“Indeed, Sir, no Monsieur
comme il faut
, ever
left Spa in such dudgeon before, unless jilted by a Polish
princess, or stripped by an itinerant Count!  You have
neither breakfasted at the Vauxhall, nor attended the Spectacle,
nor tasted the waters.  Had you but taken one sip, your
ill-humour would have all trickled away, and you would have felt
both your heels and your elbows quite alive in the
evening.”—Granted; but pray tell your postillions to
drive off as fast as their horses will carry them.

Away we went to Aix-la-Chapelle about ten at night, and saw
the mouldering turrets of that once illustrious capital by the
help of a candle and lantern.  An old woman asked our names
(for not a single soldier appeared); and traversing a number of
superannuated streets without perceiving the least trace of
Charlemagne or his Paladins, we procured comfortable though not
magnificent apartments, and slept most unheroically sound, till
it was time to set forward for Dusseldorf.

July
8
th
.—As we were driven out of the
town, I caught a glimpse of a grove, hemmed in by dingy
buildings, where a few water-drinkers were sauntering along to
the sound of some rueful French horns; the wan greenish light
admitted through the foliage made them look like unhappy souls
condemned to an eternal lounge for having trifled away their
existence.  It was not with much regret that I left such a
party behind; and, after experiencing the vicissitudes of good
roads and rumbling pavements, found myself, towards the close of
evening, upon the banks of the Rhine.

Many wild ideas thronged into my mind, the moment I beheld
this celebrated river.  I thought of the vast regions
through which it flows, and suffered my imagination to expatiate
as far as its source.  A red, variegated sky, reflected from
the stream, the woods trembling on its banks, and the spires of
Nuys rising beyond them, helped to amuse my fancy.  Not
being able to brook the confinement of the carriage, I left it to
come over at its leisure; and, stepping into a boat, rowed along,
at first, by the quivering osiers; then, launching out into the
midst of the waters, I glided a few moments with the current, and
resting on my oars, listened to the hum of voices afar off, while
several little skiffs, like canoes, glanced before my sight,
concerning which distance and the twilight allowed me to make a
thousand fantastic conjectures.  When I had sufficiently
indulged these extravagant reveries, I began to cross over the
river in good earnest; and being landed on its opposite margin,
travelled forwards to the town.

Nothing but the famous gallery of paintings could invite
strangers to stay a moment within its walls; more crooked
streets, more indifferent houses, one seldom meets with; except
soldiers, not a living creature moving about them; and at night a
complete regiment of bugs “marked me for their
own.”  Thus I lay, at once both the seat of war and
the victim of these detestable animals, till early in the morning
(Sunday, July 9th), when Morpheus, compassionating my sufferings,
opened the ivory gates of his empire, and freed his votary from
the most unconscionable vermin that ever nastiness
engendered.  In humble prose, I fell fast asleep; and
remained quiet, in defiance of my adversaries, till it was time
to survey the cabinet.

This collection is displayed in five large galleries, and
contains some valuable productions of the Italian school; but the
room most boasted of is that which Rubens has filled with no less
than three enormous representations of the last day, where an
innumerable host of sinners are exhibited as striving in vain to
avoid the tangles of the devil’s tail.  The woes of
several fat luxurious souls are rendered in the highest
gusto.  Satan’s dispute with some brawny concubines,
whom he is lugging off in spite of all their resistance, cannot
be too much admired by those who approve this class of subject,
and think such strange imbroglios in the least calculated to
raise a sublime or a religious idea.

For my own part, I turned from them with disgust, and hastened
to contemplate a Holy Family by Camillo Procaccini, in another
apartment.  The brightest imagination can never conceive any
figure more graceful than that of the young Jesus; and if ever I
beheld an inspired countenance or celestial features, it was
here: but to attempt conveying in words what colours alone can
express, would be only reversing the absurdity of many a master
in the gallery, who aims to represent those ideas by colours
which language alone is able to describe.  Should you admit
this opinion, you won’t be surprised at my passing such a
multitude of renowned pictures unnoticed; nor at my bringing you
out of the cabinet without deluging ten pages with criticisms in
the style of the ingenious Lady M—.

As I had spent so much time in gazing at Camillo’s
divinity, the day was too far advanced to think of travelling to
Cologne; I was therefore obliged to put myself once more under
the dominion of the most inveterate bugs in the universe.
This government, like many others, made but an indifferent use of
its power, and the subject suffering accordingly was extremely
rejoiced at flying from his persecutors to Cologne.

July
10
th
.—Clouds of dust hindered my
making any remarks on the exterior of this celebrated city; but
if its appearance be not more beautiful from without than within,
I defy Mr. Salmon himself to launch forth very warmly in its
praise.  But of what avail are stately palaces, broad
streets, or airy markets, to a town which can boast of such a
treasure as the bodies of those three wise sovereigns who were
star-led to Bethlehem?  Is not this circumstance enough to
procure it every respect?  I really believe so, from the
pious and dignified contentment of its inhabitants.  They
care not a hair of an ass’s ear whether their houses be
gloomy and ill-contrived, their pavements overgrown with weeds,
and their shops with filthiness, provided the carcasses of
Gaspar, Melchior, and Balthazar might be preserved with proper
decorum.  Nothing, to be sure, can be richer than the shrine
which contains these precious relics.  I paid my devotions
before it the moment I arrived; this step was inevitable: had I
omitted it, not a soul in Cologne but would have cursed me for a
Pagan.

Do you not wonder at hearing of these venerable bodies so far
from their native country?  I thought them snug in some
Arabian pyramid ten feet deep in spice; but you see one can never
tell what is to become of one a few ages hence.  Who knows
but the Emperor of Morocco may be canonized some future day in
Lapland?  I asked, of course, how in the name of miracles
they came hither; but found no story of a supernatural
conveyance.  It seems the holy Empress Helena, as great a
collectress of relics as the D—s of P. is of profane
curiosities, first routed them out: then they were packed off to
Rome.  King Alaric, having no grace, bundled them down to
Milan; where they remained till it pleased God to inspire an
ancient archbishop with the fervent wish of depositing them at
Cologne.  There these skeletons were taken into the most
especial consideration, crowned with jewels and filigreed with
gold.  Never were skulls more elegantly mounted; and I doubt
whether Odin’s buffet could exhibit so fine an
assortment.  The chapel containing these beatified bones is
placed in a dark extremity of the cathedral.  Several golden
lamps gleam along the polished marbles with which it is adorned,
and afford just light enough to read the following monkish
inscription:—

“CORPORA SANCTORUM
RECUBANT HIC TERNA MAGORUM;

EX HIS SUBLATUM NIHIL EST ALIBIVE
LOCATUM.”

After I had satisfied my curiosity with respect to the
peregrinations of the consecrated skeletons, I examined their
shrine; and was rather surprised to find it not only enriched
with barbaric gold and pearl, but covered with cameos and
intaglios of the best antique sculpture.  Many an impious
emperor and gross Silenus, many a wanton nymph and frantic
bacchanal, figure in the same range with the statues of saints
and evangelists.  How St. Helena could tolerate such a mixed
assembly (for the shrine was formed under her auspices) surpasses
my comprehension.  Perhaps you will say it is no great
matter, and give me a hint to move out of the chapel, lest the
three kings and their star should lead me quite out of my
way.  Very well; I think I had better stop in time, to tell
you, without further excursion, that we set off after dinner for
Bonn.

Our road-side was lined with beggarly children, high convent
walls, and scarecrow crucifixes, lubberly monks, dejected
peasants, and all the delights of Catholicism.  Such scenery
not engaging a share of my attention, I kept gazing at the azure
irregular mountains which bounded our view, and in thought was
already transported to their summits.  Various are the
prospects I surveyed from this imaginary exaltation, and
innumerable the chimeras which trotted in my brain.  Mounted
on these fantastic quadrupeds, I shot swiftly from rock to rock,
and built castles in the style of Piranesi upon most of their
pinnacles.  The magnificence and variety of my aërial
towers hindered my thinking the way long.  I was still
walking with a crowd of phantoms upon their terraces, when the
carriage made a halt.  Immediately descending the
innumerable flights of steps which divide such lofty edifices
from the lower world, I entered the inn at Bonn, and was shown
into an apartment which commands the chief front of the
Elector’s palace.  You may guess how contemptible it
appeared to one just returned from the court of fancy.

In other respects, I saw it in a very favourable moment; for
the twilight, shading the whole façade, concealed its
plaistered walls and painted pillars; their pediments and
capitals being tolerably well proportioned, and the range of
windows beneath considerable, I gave the architect more credit
than he deserved, and paced to and fro beneath the arcade, as
pompously as if arrived at the Vatican; but the circumstance
which rendered my walk in reality agreeable, was the prevalence
of a delicious perfume.  It was so dusky, that I was a
minute or two seeking in vain the entrance of an orangery, from
whence this reviving scent proceeded.  At length I
discovered it; and, passing under an arch, found myself in the
midst of lemon and orange trees, now in the fullest blow, which
form a continued grove before the palace, and extend, on each
side of its grand portal, out of sight.  A few steps
separate this extensive terrace from a lawn, bordered by stately
rows of beeches.  Beyond, in the centre of this striking
theatre, rises a romantic assemblage of distant mountains,
crowned with the ruins of castles, whose turrets, but faintly
seen, were just such as you have created to complete a
prospect.  I was the only human being in the misty extent of
the gardens, and was happier in my solitude than I can
describe.  No noise disturbed its silence, except the
flutter of moths and trickling of fountains.  These
undecided sounds, corresponding with the dimness and haze of the
scenery, threw me into a pensive state of mind, neither gay nor
dismal.  I recapitulated the wayward adventures of my
childhood, and traced back each moment of a period, which had
seen me happy.  Then, turning my thoughts towards future
days, my heart beat at the idea of that awful veil which covers
the time to come.  One moment, ’twas the brightest
hope that glittered behind it; the next, a series of melancholy
images clouded the perspective.  Thus, alternately swayed by
fears and exultation, I passed an interesting hour in the
twilight, ranging amongst the orange trees, or reclined by the
fountain.  I could not boast of being perfectly satisfied,
since those were absent, without whom not even the fields of Enna
could be charming.  However, I was far from displeased with
the clear streams that bubbled around, and could willingly have
dropped asleep by their margin.  Had I reposed in so
romantic a situation, the murmurs of trees and waters would
doubtless have invited “some strange mysterious
dream” to hover over me, and perhaps futurity might have
been unveiled.

LETTER VIII.

July
11
th
.—Let those who delight in
picturesque country repair to the borders of the Rhine, and
follow the road which we took from Bonn to Coblentz.  In
some places it is suspended like a cornice above the waters; in
others, it winds behind lofty steeps and broken acclivities,
shaded by woods and clothed with an endless variety of plants and
flowers.  Several green paths lead amongst this vegetation
to the summits of the rocks, which often serve as the foundation
of abbeys and castles, whose lofty roofs and spires, rising above
the cliffs, impress passengers with ideas of their grandeur, that
might probably vanish upon a nearer approach.  Not choosing
to lose any prejudice in their favour, I kept a respectful
distance whenever I left my carriage, and walked on the banks of
the river.

Just before we came to Andernach, an antiquated town with
strange morisco-looking towers, I spied a raft, at least three
hundred feet in length, on which ten or twelve cottages were
erected, and a great many people employed in sawing wood.
The women sat spinning at their doors, whilst their children
played among the water-lilies that bloomed in abundance on the
edge of the stream.  A smoke, rising from one of these
aquatic habitations, partially obscured the mountains beyond, and
added not a little, to their effect.

Altogether, the scene was so novel and amusing, that I sat
half an hour contemplating it from an eminence under the shade of
some leafy walnuts; and should like extremely to build a moveable
village, people it with my friends, and so go floating about from
island to island, and from one woody coast of the Rhine to
another.  Would you dislike such a party?  I am much
deceived, or you would be the first to explore the shades and
promontories beneath which we should be wafted along.

But I don’t think you would find Coblentz, where we were
obliged to take up our night’s lodging, much to your
taste.  ’Tis a mean, dirty assemblage of plastered
houses, striped with paint, and set off with wooden galleries, in
the beautiful taste of St. Giles’s.  Above, on a rock,
stands the palace of the Elector, which seems to be remarkable
for nothing but situation.  I did not bestow many looks on
this structure whilst ascending the mountain across which our
road to Mayence conducted us.

July
12
th
.—Having attained the summit, we
discovered a vast, irregular range of country, and advancing,
found ourselves amongst downs bounded by forests and purpled with
thyme.  This sort of prospect extending for several leagues,
I walked on the turf, and inhaled with avidity the fresh gales
that blew over its herbage, till I came to a steep slope
overgrown with privet and a variety of luxuriant shrubs in
blossom; there reposing beneath its shade, I gathered flowers,
listened to the bees, observed their industry, and idled away a
few minutes with great fascination.  A cloudless sky and
bright sunshine made me rather loth to move on; but the charms of
the landscape, increasing every instant, drew me forward.

I had not gone far, before a winding valley discovered itself,
shut in by rocks and mountains clothed to their very summits with
the thickest woods.  A broad river, flowing at the base of
the cliffs, reflected the impending vegetation, and looked so
calm and glassy that I was determined to be better acquainted
with it.  For this purpose we descended by a zigzag path
into the vale, and making the best of our way on the banks of the
Lune (for so is the river called), came suddenly upon the town of
Ems, famous in mineral story; where finding very good lodgings,
we took up our abode, and led an Indian life amongst the wilds
and mountains.

After supper I walked on a smooth lawn by the river, to
observe the moon journeying through a world of silver clouds that
lay dispersed over the face of the heavens.  It was a mild
genial evening; every mountain cast its broad shadow on the
surface of the stream; lights twinkled afar off on the hills;
they burnt in silence.  All were asleep, except a female
figure in white, with glow-worms shining in her hair.  She
kept moving disconsolately about; sometimes I heard her sigh; and
if apparitions sigh, this must have been an apparition.
Upon my return, I asked a thousand questions, but could never
obtain any information of the figure and its luminaries.

July
13
th
.—The pure air of the morning
invited me early to the hills.  Hiring a skiff, I rowed
about a mile down the stream, and landed on a sloping meadow,
level with the waters, and newly mown.  Heaps of hay still
lay dispersed under the copses which hemmed in on every side this
little sequestered paradise.  What a spot for a tent!
I could encamp here for months, and never be tired.  Not a
day would pass by without discovering some new promontory, some
untrodden pasture, some unsuspected vale, where I might remain
among woods and precipices lost and forgotten.  I would give
you, and two or three more, the clue of my labyrinth: nobody else
should be conscious of its entrance.  Full of such agreeable
dreams, I rambled about the meads, scarcely knowing which way I
was going; sometimes a spangled fly led me astray, and, oftener,
my own strange fancies.  Between both, I was perfectly
bewildered, and should never have found my boat again, had not an
old German naturalist, who was collecting fossils on the cliffs,
directed me to it.

When I got home it was growing late, and I now began to
perceive that I had taken no refreshment, except the perfume of
the hay and a few wood strawberries; airy diet, you will observe,
for one not yet received into the realms of Ginnistan.
[127]

July
14
th
.—I have just made a discovery,
that this place as full of idlers and water-drinkers as their
Highnesses of Orange and Hesse Darmstadt can desire; for to them
accrue all the profits of its salubrious fountains.  I
protest, I knew nothing of all this yesterday, so entirely was I
taken up with the rocks and meadows; no chance of meeting either
card or billiard players in their solitudes.  Both abound at
Ems, where they hop and fidget from ball to ball, unconscious of
the bold scenery in their neighbourhood, and totally insensible
to its charms.  They had no notion, not they, of admiring
barren crags and precipices, where even the Lord would lose his
way, as a coarse lubber decorated with stars and orders very
ingeniously observed to me; nor could they form the least
conception of any pleasure there was in climbing like a goat
amongst the cliffs, and then diving into woods and recesses where
the sun had never penetrated; where there were neither
card-tables prepared nor sideboards garnished; no
jambon de
Mayence
in waiting; no supply of pipes, nor any of the
commonest delights, to be met with in the commonest taverns.

To all this I acquiesced with most perfect submission, but
immediately left the orator to entertain a circle of antiquated
dames and weather-beaten officers who were gathering around
him.  Scarcely had I turned my back upon this polite
assembly, when
Monsieur l’Administrateur des bains
,
a fine pompous fellow, who had been
maitre
d’hôtel
in a great German family, came forward
purposely to acquaint me, I suppose, that their baths had the
honour of possessing Prince Orloff, “
avec sa grande
maitresse
,
son Chamberlain et quelques Dames
d’Honneur
:” moreover, that his Highness came
hither to refresh himself after his laborious employments at the
Court of Petersburg, and expected (
grace aux eaux
!) to
return to the domains his august sovereign had lately bestowed
upon him in perfect health, and to become the father of his
people.

Wishing Monsieur d’Orloff all possible success, I should
have left the company at a great distance, had not a violent
shower stopped my career, and obliged me to return to my
apartment.  The rain growing heavier, intercepted the
prospect of the mountains, and spread such a gloom over the vale
as sank my spirits fifty degrees; to which a close foggy
atmosphere not a little contributed.  Towards night the
clouds assumed a more formidable aspect.  Thunder rolled
awfully along the distant cliffs, and several rapid torrents
began to run down the steeps.  Unable to stay within, I
walked into an open portico, listening to the murmur of the
river, mingled with the roar of falling waters.  At
intervals a blue flash of lightning discovered their agitated
surface, and two or three scared women rushing through the storm
and calling all the saints in Paradise to their assistance.

Things were in this state, when the orator who had harangued
so brilliantly on the nothingness of ascending mountains, took
shelter under the porch, and entering immediately into
conversation, regaled my ears with a woful narration of murders
which had happened the other day on the precise road I was to
follow next morning.

“Sir,” said he, “your route is, to be sure,
very perilous: on the left you have a chasm, down which, should
your horses take the smallest alarm, you are infallibly
precipitated; to the right hangs an impervious wood, and there,
sir, I can assure you, are wolves enough to devour a regiment; a
little farther on, you cross a desolate tract of forest land, the
roads so deep and broken, that if you go ten paces in as many
minutes you may think yourself fortunate.  There lurk the
most savage banditti in Europe, lately irritated by the Prince of
Orange’s proscription; and so desperate, that if they once
attack, you can expect no mercy.  Should you venture through
this hazardous district to-morrow, you will, in all probability,
meet a company of people who have just left the town to search
for the mangled bodies of their relations; but, for
Heaven’s sake, sir, if you value your life, do not suffer
an idle curiosity to lead you over such dangerous regions,
however picturesque their appearance.”

I own I felt rather intimidated by so formidable a prospect,
and was very near abandoning my plan of crossing the mountains,
and so go back again and round about, the Lord knows where; but
considering this step would be quite unheroical, I resolved to
attribute my fears to the gloom of the moment, and the dejection
it occasioned.  It was almost nine o’clock before my
kind adviser ceased inspiring me with terrors; then, finding
myself at liberty, I retired to bed, not under the most agreeable
impressions; and after tossing and tumbling in the agitation of
tumultuous slumbers, I started up at seven in the morning of July
15th, ordered the horses, and set forward, without further
dilemmas.  Though it had thundered almost the whole night,
the air was still clogged with vapours, the mountains bathed in
humid clouds, and the scene I had so warmly admired no longer
discernible.  Proceeding along the edge of the precipices I
had been forewarned of, for about an hour, and escaping that
peril at least, we traversed the slopes of a rude, heathy hill,
in instantaneous expectation of foes and murderers.  A misty
rain prevented us seeing above ten yards before us, and every
uncouth oak or rocky fragment we approached seemed lurking spies
or gigantic enemies.  One time the murmur of the wind among
invisible woods of beech, sounded like the wail of distress; and
at another the noise of a torrent we could not discover,
counterfeited the report of musquetry.  In this suspicious
manner we journeyed through the forest which had so recently been
the scene of assaults and depredations.  At length, after
winding several restless hours amongst its dreary avenues, we
emerged into open daylight.  The sky cleared, a cultivated
vale lay before us, and the evening sun, gleaming bright through
the vapours, cast a cheerful look upon some corn-fields, and
seemed to promise better times.  A few minutes more brought
us safe to the village of Viesbaden, where we slept in peace and
tranquillity.

July
16
th
.—Our apprehensions entirely
dispersed, we rose light and refreshed from our slumbers, and
passing through Mayence, Oppenheim, and Worms, travelled gaily
over the plain in which Mannheim is situated.  The sun set
before we arrived there, and it was by the mild gleams of the
rising moon, that I first beheld the vast electoral palace, and
those long straight streets and neat white houses, which
distinguish this elegant capital from almost every other.

Numbers of well-dressed people were amusing themselves with
music and fireworks in the squares and open spaces; other groups
appeared conversing in circles before their doors, and enjoying
the serenity of the evening.  Almost every window bloomed
with carnations; and we could hardly cross a street without
hearing the German flute.  A scene of such happiness and
refinement contrasted in the most agreeable manner with the
dismal prospects we had left behind.  No storms, no
frightful chasms, were here to alarm us, no ruffians or lawless
plunderers.  All around was peace, security, and contentment
in their most engaging attire.

July
17
th
.—Though all impatience to reach
that delightful classic region which already possesses, as I have
often said, the better half of my spirit, I could not think of
leaving Mannheim unexplored; and therefore resolved to give up
the day to the halls and galleries of the electoral palace.
Those, which contain the cabinet of paintings and sculptures in
ivory, form a regular suite of nine immense apartments, about
three hundred and seventy-two feet in length, well-proportioned
and uniformly floored with inlaid wood.  Each room has ample
folding-doors richly gilt and varnished.  When seen in
perspective these entrances have the most magnificent effect
imaginable.  Nothing can give nobler ideas of space than
such an enfilade of saloons unencumbered by heavy furniture,
where the eyes range without interruption: I wandered alone from
one to the other, and was never wearied with contemplating the
variety of pictures which enliven the scene, and convey the
highest idea of the collector’s taste.  When my
curiosity was a little satisfied, I left this amusing series of
apartments with regret, visited the library which the present
Elector Palatine has formed, upon the same great scale that
characterizes his other collections, and, after viewing the rest
of the palace, saw the opera house, which may boast of having
contained one of the first bands in Europe: from thence I
returned home in a very musical humour.

An excellent harpsichord seconded this disposition, which
lasted me till late in the evening; when growing drowsy, I
yielded to the influence of sleep, and was in an instant
transported to a far more delightful palace than that of the
elector; where I expatiated in perfumed apartments with yellow
light, and conversed with none but Albano and Claude Lorrain,
till the beams of the morning sun entered my chamber, and forced
my visiting companions to fly murmuring to the shades.  I
cannot say but I was sorry to leave Mannheim, though my
acquaintance with it was entirely confined to inanimate
objects.  The cheerful air and free range of the galleries
would be sufficient, for several days, for my amusement; as you
know I could people them with phantoms.  Not many leagues
out of town, lie the famous gardens of Schweidsing.  The
weather being extremely warm, we were glad to avail ourselves of
their shades.  There are a great many fountains inclosed by
thickets of shrubs, and cool alleys which lead to arbours of
trellis-work, festooned with nasturtiums and convolvuluses.
Several catalpas and sumachs in full flower gave considerable
richness to the scenery; and whilst we walked amongst them, a
fresh breeze gently waved their summits.  The tall poplars
and acacias, quivering with the air, cast innumerable shadows on
the intervening plats of greensward, and, as they moved their
branches, discovered other walks beyond, and distant jets of
water rising above their foliage, and sparkling in the sun.
After passing a multitude of shady avenues, terminated by temples
or groups of statues, we followed our guide through a kind of
arched bower to a little opening in the wood, neatly paved with
different coloured pebbles.  On one side, appeared niches
and alcoves, ornamented with spars and polished marbles; on the
other, an aviary; in front, a superb pavilion, with baths,
porticos, and cabinets, fitted up in the most elegant and
luxurious style.  The song of exotic birds; the freshness of
the surrounding verdure heightened by falling streams; and that
dubious poetic light admitted through thick foliage, so agreeable
after the glare of a sultry day, detained me for some time in an
alcove reading Spenser, and imagining myself but a few paces
removed from the Idle Lake.  I would fain have loitered an
hour more in this enchanted bower, had not the gardener, whose
patience was quite exhausted, and who had never heard of the
Red-Cross Knight and his achievements, dragged me away to a
sunburnt, contemptible hillock, commanding the view of a
serpentine ditch, and decorated with the title of Jardin
Anglois.  Some object like decayed limekilns and mouldering
ovens, is disposed in an amphitheatrical form, on the declivity
of this tremendous eminence: and there is to be ivy, and a
cascade, and what not, as my conductor observed.  A glance
was all I bestowed on this caricature upon English gardens; I
then went off in a huff at being chased from my bower, and
grumbled all the road to Entsweigen; where, to our misfortune, we
lay amidst hogs and vermin, who amply revenged my quarrels with
their country.

July
20
th
.—After travelling a post or two,
we came in sight of a green moor, with many insulated woods and
villages; the Danube sweeping majestically along, and the city of
Ulm rising upon its banks.  The fields in its neighbourhood
were overspread with cloths bleaching in the sun, and waiting for
barks which convey them down the great river, in ten days, to
Vienna, and from thence through Hungary, into the midst of the
Turkish Empire.  I almost envied the merchants their voyage,
and descending to the edge of the stream, proffered my orisons to
Father Danube, beseeching him to remember me to the regions
through which he flows.  I promised him an altar and solemn
rites, should he grant my request, and was very idolatrous, until
the shadows lengthening over the unlimited plains on his margin,
reminded me that the sun would be shortly sunk, and that I had
still above fifteen miles to go.  Gathering a purple iris
that grew upon the bank, I wore it to his honour; and have reason
to fancy my piety was rewarded, as not a fly or an insect dared
to buzz about me the whole evening.

You never saw a brighter sky nor more glowing clouds than
gilded our horizon.  The air was impregnated with the
perfume of clover, and for ten miles we beheld no other objects
than smooth levels enamelled with flowers, and interspersed with
thickets of oak, beyond which appeared a long series of
mountains, that distance and the evening tinged with an
interesting azure.  Such were the very spots for youthful
games and exercises, open spaces for tilts, and spreading shades
to screen the spectators.

Father Lafiteau tells us, there are many such vast and flowery
meads in the interior of America, to which the roving tribes of
Indians repair once or twice in a century to settle the rights of
the chase, and lead their solemn dances; and so deep an
impression do these assemblies leave on the minds of the savages,
that the highest ideas they entertain of future felicity consist
in the perpetual enjoyment of songs and dances upon the green
boundless lawns of their elysium.  In the midst of these
visionary plains rises the abode of Aneantsic, encircled by
choirs of departed chieftains leaping in cadence to the mournful
sound of spears as they ring on the shell of the tortoise.
Their favourite attendants, long separated from them whilst on
earth, are restored again in this ethereal region, and skim
freely over the vast level space; now hailing one group of
beloved friends, and now another.  Mortals newly ushered by
death into this world of pure blue sky and boundless meads, see
the long-lost objects of their affection advancing across the
lawn to meet them.  Flights of familiar birds, the purveyors
of many an earthly chase, once more attend their progress, whilst
the shades of their faithful dogs seem coursing each other
below.  Low murmurs and tinkling sounds fill the whole
region, and, as its new denizens proceed, increase in melody,
till, unable to resist the thrilling music, they spring forward
in ecstasies to join the eternal round.

A share of this celestial transport seemed communicated to me
whilst my eyes wandered over the plain, which appeared to widen
and extend in proportion as the twilight prevailed.

The dusky hour, favourable to conjurations, allowed me to
believe the spirits of departed friends not far removed from the
clouds, which, to all appearance, reposed at the extremity of the
prospect, and tinted the surface of the horizon with ruddy
colours.  This glow still lingered upon the verge of the
landscape, after the sun disappeared; and ’twas in those
peaceful moments, when no sound but the browsing of cattle
reached me, that I imagined benign looks were cast upon me from
the golden vapours, and I seemed to catch glimpses of faint forms
moving, amongst them, which were once so dear; and even thought
my ears affected by well-known voices, long silent upon
earth.  When the warm hues of the sky were gradually fading,
and the distant thickets began to assume a deeper and more
melancholy blue, I fancied a shape like Thisbe
[133]
shot swiftly along; and, sometimes
halting afar off, cast an affectionate look upon her old master,
that seemed to say, When you draw near the last inevitable hour,
and the pale countries of Aneantsic are stretched out before you,
I will precede your footsteps, and guide them safe through the
wild labyrinths which separate this world from yours.  I was
so possessed with the ideas and so full of the remembrance of
that poor, affectionate creature, whose miserable end you were
the witness of, that I did not, for several minutes, perceive our
arrival at Guntsberg.  Hurrying to bed, I seemed in my
slumbers to pass that interdicted boundary which divides our
earth from the region of Indian happiness.  Thisbe ran
nimbly before me; her white form glimmered amongst dusky forests;
she led me into an infinitely spacious plain, where I heard vast
multitudes discoursing upon events to come.  What further
passed must never be revealed.  I awoke in tears, and could
hardly find spirits enough to look around me, till we were
driving through the midst of Augsburg.

July
21
st
.—We dined and rambled about this
renowned city till evening.  The colossal paintings on the
walls of almost every considerable building gave it a strange
air, which pleases upon the score of novelty.

Having passed a number of streets decorated in this exotic
manner, we found ourselves suddenly before the public hall, by a
noble statue of Augustus, under whose auspices the colony was
formed.  Which way soever we turned, our eyes met some
remarkable edifice, or marble basin into which several groups of
sculptured river-gods pour a profusion of waters.  These
stately fountains and bronze statues, the extraordinary size and
loftiness of the buildings, the towers rising in perspective, and
the Doric portal of the town-house, answered in some measure the
idea Montfaucon gives us of the scene of an ancient
tragedy.  Whenever a pompous Flemish painter attempts a
representation of Troy, and displays in his background those
streets of palaces described in the Iliad, Augsburg, or some such
city, may easily be traced.  Sometimes a corner of Antwerp
discovers itself; and generally, above a Corinthian portico,
rises a Gothic spire.  Just such a jumble may be viewed from
the statue of Augustus, under which I remained till the Concierge
came, who was to open the gates of the town-house, and show me
its magnificent hall.

I wished for you exceedingly when, ascending a flight of a
hundred steps, I entered it through a portal, supported by tall
pillars and crowned with a majestic pediment.  Upon
advancing, I discovered five more entrances equally grand, with
golden figures of guardian genii leaning over the entablature;
and saw, through a range of windows, each above thirty feet high,
and nearly level with the marble pavement, the whole city, with
all its roofs and spires, beneath my feet.  The pillars,
cornices, and panels of this striking apartment are uniformly
tinged with brown and gold; and the ceiling, enriched with
emblematical paintings and innumerable canopies of carved work,
casts a very magisterial shade.  Upon the whole, I should
not be surprised at a burgomaster assuming a formidable dignity
in such a room.

I must confess it had a somewhat similar effect upon me; and I
descended the flight of steps with as much pomposity as if a
triumphal car waited at my feet, or as if on the point of giving
audience to the Queen of Sheba.  It happened to be a
Saint’s day, and half the inhabitants of Augsburg were
gathered together in the opening before their hall; the greatest
numbers, especially the women, still exhibiting the very
identical dresses which Hollar engraved.  My lofty gait
imposed upon this primitive assembly, which receded to give me
passage with as much silent respect as if I had really been the
wise sovereign of Israel.  When I got home, an execrable
supper was served up to my majesty; I scolded in an unroyal
style, and soon convinced myself I was no longer Solomon.

July
22
nd
.—Joy to the Electors of Bavaria!
for planting such extensive woods of fir in their dominions as
shade over the chief part of the road from Augsburg to
Munich.  Near the last-mentioned city, I cannot boast of the
scenery changing to advantage.  Instead of flourishing woods
and verdure, we beheld a parched dreary flat, diversified by
fields of withering barley, and stunted avenues drawn formally
across them; now and then a stagnant pool, and sometimes a
dunghill, by way of regale.  However, the wild rocks of the
Tyrol terminate the view, and to them imagination may fly, and
walk amidst springs and lilies of her own creation.  I speak
from authority, having had the pleasure of anticipating an
evening in this romantic style.

Tuesday next is the grand fair, with horse-races and
junketings: a piece of news I was but too soon acquainted with;
for the moment we entered the town, good-natured creatures from
all quarters advised us to get out of it; since traders and
harlequins had filled every corner of the place, and there was
not a lodging to be procured.  The inns, to be sure, were
like hives of industrious animals sorting their merchandise, and
preparing their goods for sale.  Yet, in spite of
difficulties, we got possession of a quiet apartment.

July
23
rd
.—We were driven in the evening
to Nymphenburg, the Elector’s country palace, whose
bosquets, jets-d’eaux, and parterres are the pride of the
Bavarians.  The principal platform is all of a glitter with
gilded Cupids and shining serpents spouting at every pore.
Beds of poppies, hollyhocks, scarlet lychnis, and the most
flaming flowers, border the edge of the walks, which extend till
the perspective meets, and swarm with ladies and gentlemen in
parti-coloured raiment.  The Queen of Golconda’s
gardens in a French opera are scarcely more gaudy and
artificial.  Unluckily, too, the evening was fine, and the
sun so powerful that we were half roasted before we could cross
the great avenue and enter the thickets, which barely conceal a
very splendid hermitage, where we joined Mr. and Mrs. T., and a
party of fashionable Bavarians.

Amongst the ladies was Madame la Contesse, I forget who, a
production of the venerable Haslang, with her daughter, Madame de
—, who has the honour of leading the Elector in her
chains.  These goddesses stepping into a car, vulgarly
called a cariole, the mortals followed, and explored alley after
alley and pavilion after pavilion.  Then, having viewed
Pagodenburg, which is, as they told me, all Chinese; and
Marienburg, which is most assuredly all tinsel; we paraded by a
variety of fountains in full squirt, and though they certainly
did their best (for many were set a-going on purpose), I cannot
say I greatly admired them.

The ladies were very gaily attired, and the gentlemen, as
smart as swords, bags, and pretty clothes could make them, looked
exactly like the fine people one sees represented in a coloured
print.  Thus we kept walking genteelly about the orangery,
till the carriage drew up and conveyed us to Mr. T’s.

Immediately after supper, we drove once more out of town, to a
garden and tea-room, where all degrees and ages dance jovially
together till morning.  Whilst one party wheel briskly away
in the valz, another amuse themselves in a corner with cold meat
and rhenish.  That despatched, out they whisk amongst the
dancers, with an impetuosity and liveliness I little expected to
have found in Bavaria.  After turning round and round, with
a rapidity that is quite inconceivable to an English dancer, the
music changes to a slower movement, and then follows a succession
of zig-zag minuets, performed by old and young, straight and
crooked, noble and plebeian, all at once, from one end of the
room to the other.  Tallow candles snuffing and stinking,
dishes changing, heads scratching, and all sorts of performances
going forward at the same moment; the flutes, oboes, and bassoons
snorting and grunting with peculiar emphasis; now fast, now slow,
just as Variety commands, who seems to rule the ceremonial of
this motley assembly, where every distinction of rank and
privilege is totally forgotten.  Once a week, on Sundays
that is to say, the rooms are open, and Monday is generally
somewhat advanced before they are deserted.  If good humour
and coarse merriment are all that people desire, here they are to
be found in perfection, though at the expense of toes and
noses.  Both these extremities of my person suffered most
cruelly; and I was not sorry to retire about one in the morning
to a purer atmosphere.

July
24
th
.—Custom condemned us to visit
the palace, which glares with looking-glass, gilding, and cut
velvet, most sumptuously fringed and spangled.  The chapel,
though small, is richer than anything Crœsus ever
possessed, let them say what they will.  Not a corner but
shines with gold, diamonds, and scraps of martyrdom studded with
jewels.  I had the delight of treading amethysts and the
richest gems under foot, which, if you recollect, Apuleius thinks
such supreme felicity.  Alas! I was quite unworthy of the
honour, and had much rather have trodden the turf of the
mountains.  Mammon would never have taken his eyes off the
pavement; mine soon left the contemplation of it, and fixed on
St. Peter’s thumb, enshrined with a degree of elegance, and
adorned by some malapert enthusiast with several of the most
delicate antique cameos I ever beheld; the subjects, Ledas and
sleeping Venuses, are a little too pagan, one should think, for
an apostle’s finger.

From this precious repository we were conducted through the
public garden to a large hall, where part of the Sleitzom
collection is piled up, till a gallery can be finished for its
reception.  ’Twas a matter of great favour to view, in
this state, the pieces that compose it,—a very imperfect
one too, since some of the best were under operation.  But I
would not upon any account have missed the sight of
Rubens’s “Massacre of the Innocents.”
Such expressive horrors were never yet transferred to canvas, and
Moloch himself might have gazed at them with pleasure.

After dinner we were led round the churches; and if you are as
much tired with reading my voluminous descriptions, as I was with
the continual repetition of altars and reliquaries, the Lord have
mercy upon you!  However, your delivery draws near.
The post is going out, and to-morrow we shall begin to mount the
cliffs of the Tyrol; but don’t be afraid of any long-winded
epistles from their summits: I shall be too well employed in
ascending them.  Just now, as I have lain by a long while, I
grow sleek, and scribble on in mere wantonness of spirit.
What excesses such a correspondence is capable of, you will soon
be able to judge.

July
25
th
.—The noise of the people
thronging to the fair did not allow me to slumber very long in
the morning.  When I got up, every street was crowded with
Jews and mountebanks, holding forth and driving their bargains in
all the energetic vehemence of the German tongue.  Vast
quantities of rich merchandise glittered in the shops as we
passed along to the gates.  Heaps of fruit and sweetmeats
set half the grandams and infants in the place a-cackling with
felicity.

Mighty glad was I to make my escape; and in about an hour or
two, we entered a wild tract of country, not unlike the skirts of
a princely park.  A little farther on stands a cluster of
cottages, where we stopped to give our horses some bread, and
were pestered with swarms of flies, most probably journeying to
Munich fair, there to feast upon sugared tarts and
bottle-noses.

The next post brought us over hill and dale, grove and meadow,
to a narrow plain, watered by rivulets and surrounded by cliffs,
under which lies scattered the village of Wollrathshausen,
consisting of several cottages, built entirely of fir, with
strange galleries hanging over the way.  Nothing can be
neater than the carpentry of these simple edifices, nor more
solid than their construction; many of them looked as if they had
braved the torrents which fell from the mountains a century ago;
and, if one may judge from the hoary appearance of the
inhabitants, here are patriarchs who remember the Emperor Lewis
of Bavaria.  Orchards of cherry-trees impend from the steeps
above the village, which to our certain knowledge produce no
contemptible fruit.

Having refreshed ourselves with their cooling juice, we struck
into a grove of pines, the tallest and most flourishing perhaps
we ever beheld.  There seemed no end to these forests, save
where little irregular spots of herbage, fed by cattle,
intervened.  Whenever we gained an eminence it was only to
discover more ranges of dark wood, variegated with meadows and
glittering streams.  White clover and a profusion of
sweet-scented flowers clothe their banks; above, waves the
mountain-ash, glowing with scarlet berries; and beyond, rise
hills and rocks and mountains, piled upon one another, and
fringed with fir to their topmost acclivities.  Perhaps the
Norwegian forests alone equal these in grandeur and extent.
Those which cover the Swiss highlands rarely convey such vast
ideas.  There, the woods climb only half way up their
ascents, and then are circumscribed by snows: here, no boundaries
are set to their progress, and the mountains, from their bases to
their summits, display rich unbroken masses of vegetation.

As we were surveying this prospect, a thick cloud, fraught
with thunder, obscured the transparence of the horizon, whilst
flashes startled our horses, whose snorts and stampings resounded
through the woods.  What from the shade of the firs and the
impending tempests, we travelled several miles almost in total
darkness.  One moment the clouds began to fleet, and a faint
gleam promised serener hours, but the next all was gloom and
terror; presently a deluge of rain poured down upon the valley,
and in a short time the torrents, beginning to swell, raged with
such fury as to be with difficulty forded.  Twilight drew
on, just as we had passed the most terrible; then ascending a
steep hill under a mountain, whose pines and birches rustled with
the storm, we saw a little lake below.  A deep azure haze
veiled its eastern shore, and lowering vapours concealed the
cliffs to the south; but over its western extremities a few
transparent clouds, the remains of the rays of a struggling
sunset, were suspended, which streamed on the surface of the
waters, and tinged with tender pink the brow of a verdant
promontory.

I could not help fixing myself on the banks of the lake for
several minutes, till this apparition was lost, and confounded
with the shades of night.  Looking round, I shuddered at a
craggy mountain, clothed in dark forests and almost
perpendicular, that was absolutely to be surmounted before we
could arrive at Wallersee.  No house, not even a shed
appearing, we were forced to ascend the peak, and penetrate these
awful groves.

Great praise is due to the directors of the roads across them,
which, considering their situation, are wonderfully fine.
Mounds of stone support the passage in some places; and, in
others, it is hewn with incredible labour through the solid
rock.  Beeches and pines of a hundred feet high, darken the
way with their gigantic branches, casting a chill around, and
diffusing a woody odour.  As we advanced, in the thick
shade, amidst the spray of torrents, and heard their loud roar in
the chasm beneath, I could scarcely help thinking myself
transported to the Grande Chartreuse; and began to conceive hopes
of once more beholding St. Bruno.
[140]
But, though
that venerable father did not vouchsafe an apparition, or call to
me again from the depths of the dells, he protected his votary
from nightly perils, and brought us to the banks of Wallersee
Lake.  We saw lights gleam upon its shores, which directed
us to a cottage where we reposed after our toils, and were soon
lulled to sleep by the fall of distant waters.

July
26
th
.—The sun rose many hours before
me, and when I got up was spangling the surface of the lake,
which expands between steeps of wood, crowned by lofty crags and
pinnacles.  We had an opportunity of contemplating this bold
assemblage as we travelled on the banks of the Meer, where it
forms a bay sheltered by impending forests; the water, tinged by
their reflection with a deep cerulean, calm and tranquil.
Mountains of pine and beech rising above, close every outlet;
and, no village or spire peeping out of the foliage, impress an
idea of more than European solitude.  I could contentedly
have passed a summer’s moon in these retirements, hollowed
myself a canoe, and fished for sustenance.

From the shore of Wallersee, our road led us straight through
arching groves, which the axe seems never to have violated, to
the summit of a rock covered with spurge-laurel, and worn by the
course of torrents into innumerable craggy forms.  Beneath,
lay extended a chaos of shattered cliffs, with tall pines
springing from their crevices, and rapid streams hurrying between
their intermingled trunks and branches.  As yet, no hut
appeared, no mill, no bridge, no trace of human existence.

After a few hours’ journey through the wilderness, we
began to discover a wreath of smoke; and presently the cottage
from whence it arose, composed of planks, and reared on the very
brink of a precipice.  Piles of cloven spruce-fir were
dispersed before the entrance, on a little spot of verdure
browsed by goats; near them sat an aged man with hoary whiskers,
his white locks tucked under a fur cap.  Two or three
beautiful children, their hair neatly braided, played around him;
and a young woman, dressed in a short robe and Polish-looking
bonnet, peeped out of a wicket window.

I was so much struck with the exotic appearance of this
sequestered family, that, crossing a rivulet, I clambered up to
their cottage and begged some refreshment.  Immediately
there was a contention amongst the children, who should be the
first to oblige me.  A little black-eyed girl succeeded, and
brought me an earthen jug full of milk, with crumbled bread, and
a platter of strawberries fresh picked from the bank.  I
reclined in the midst of my smiling hosts, and spread my repast
on the turf: never could I be waited upon with more hospitable
grace.  The only thing I wanted was language to express my
gratitude; and it was this deficiency which made me quit them so
soon.  The old man seemed visibly concerned at my departure;
and his children followed me a long way down the rocks, talking
in a dialect which passes all understanding, and waving their
hands to bid me adieu.

I had hardly lost sight of them and regained my carriage
before we entered a forest of pines, to all appearance without
bounds, of every age and figure; some, feathered to the ground
with flourishing branches; others, decayed into shapes like
Lapland idols.  I can imagine few situations more dreadful
than to be lost at night amidst this confusion of trunks, hollow
winds whistling among the branches, and strewing their cones
below.  Even at noonday, I thought we should never have
found our way out.

At last, having descended a long avenue, endless perspectives
opening on either side, we emerged into a valley bounded by
swelling hills, divided into agreeable shady inclosures, where
many herds were grazing.  A rivulet flows along the pastures
beneath; and after winding through the village of Boidou, loses
itself in a narrow pass amongst the cliffs and precipices which
rise above the cultivated slopes, and frame in this happy
pastoral region.  All the plain was in sunshine, the sky
blue, and the heights illuminated, except one rugged peak with
spires of rock, shaped not unlike the views I have seen of Sinai,
and wrapped, like that sacred mount, in clouds and
darkness.  At the base of this tremendous mass, lies a neat
hamlet called Mittenvald, surrounded by thickets and banks of
verdure, and watered by frequent springs, whose sight and murmurs
were so reviving in the midst of a sultry day, that we could not
think of leaving their vicinity, but remained at Mittenvald the
whole evening.

Our inn had long airy galleries, and a pleasant balcony
fronting the mountain.  In one of these we dined upon trout
fresh from the rills, and cherries just culled from the orchards
that cover the slopes above.  The clouds were dispersing,
and the topmost peak half visible, before we ended our
repast.  Every moment discovering some inaccessible cliff or
summit, shining through the mists, and tinted by the sun with
pale golden colours.  These appearances filled me with such
delight and with such a train of romantic associations, that I
left the table and ran to an open field beyond the huts and
gardens, to gaze in solitude and catch the vision before it
dissolved away.  You, if any human being is able, may
conceive true ideas of these glowing vapours sailing over the
pointed rocks; and brightening them in their passage with amber
light.

When all were faded and lost in the blue ether, I had time to
look around me and notice the mead in which I was standing.
Here, clover covered its surface; there, crops of grain; further
on, beds of herbs and the sweetest flowers.  An amphitheatre
of hills and rocks, broken into a variety of glens and
precipices, guards the plain from intrusion, and opens a course
for several clear rivulets, which, after gurgling amidst loose
stones and fragments, fall down the steeps, and are concealed and
quieted in the herbage of the vale.

A cottage or two peep out of the woods that hang over the
waterfalls; and on the brow of the hills above, appears a series
of eleven little chapels, uniformly built.  I followed the
narrow path that leads to them, on the edge of the eminences, and
met a troop of beautiful peasants, all of the name of Anna (for
it was her saintship’s day), going to pay their devotions,
severally, at these neat white fanes.  There were faces that
Guercino would not have disdained copying, with braids of hair
the softest and most luxuriant I ever beheld.  Some had
wreathed it simply with flowers, other with rolls of a thin linen
(manufactured in the neighbourhood), and disposed it with a
degree of elegance one should not have expected on the cliffs of
the Tyrol.

Being arrived, they knelt all together at the first chapel, on
the steps, a minute or two, whispered a short prayer, and then
dispersed each to her fane.  Every little building had now
its fair worshipper, and you may well conceive how much such
figures, scattered about the landscape, increased its
charms.  Notwithstanding the fervour of their adorations
(for at intervals they sighed and beat their white bosoms with
energy), several bewitching profane glances were cast at me as I
passed by.  Don’t be surprised, then, if I became a
convert to idolatry in so amiable a form, and worshipped St. Anna
on the score of her namesakes.

When got beyond the last chapel, I began to hear the roar of a
cascade in a thick wood of beech and chestnut that clothes the
steeps of a wide fissure in the rock.  My ear soon guided me
to its entrance, which was marked by a shed encompassed with
mossy fragments, and almost concealed by bushes of the
caper-plant in full red bloom.  Amongst these I struggled,
till, reaching a goat-track, it conducted me, on the brink of the
foaming waters, to the very depths of the cliff, whence issues a
stream which dashes impetuously down, strikes against a ledge of
rocks, and sprinkles the impending thicket with dew.  Big
drops hung on every spray, and glittered on the leaves partially
gilt by the rays of the declining sun, whose mellow hues softened
the summits of the cliffs, and diffused a repose, a divine calm,
over this deep retirement, which inclined me to imagine it the
extremity of the earth, and the portal of some other region of
existence; some happy world beyond the dark groves of pine, the
caves and awful mountains, where the river takes its
source!  I hung eagerly on the gulph, impressed with this
idea, and fancied myself listening to a voice that bubbled up
with the waters; then looked into the abyss and strained my eyes
to penetrate its gloom, but all was dark and unfathomable as
futurity!  Awakening from my reverie, I felt the damps of
the water chill my forehead, and ran shivering out of the vale to
avoid them.  A warmer atmosphere, that reigned in the meads
I had wandered across before, tempted me to remain a good while
longer, collecting the wild pinks with which they are strewed in
profusion, and a species of thyme scented like myrrh.
Whilst I was thus employed, a confused murmur struck my ear, and,
on turning towards a cliff, backed by the woods from whence the
sound seemed to proceed, forth issued a herd of goats, hundreds
after hundreds, skipping down the steeps: then followed two
shepherd boys, gamboling together as they drove their creatures
along: soon after, the dog made his appearance, hunting a stray
heifer which brought up the rear.  I followed them with my
eyes till lost in the windings of the valley, and heard the
tinkling of their bells die gradually away.  Now the last
blush of crimson left the summit of Sinai, inferior mountains
being long since cast in deep blue shades.  The village was
already hushed when I regained it, and in a few moments I
followed its example.

July
27
th
.—We pursued our journey to
Inspruck, through the wildest scenes of wood and mountain that
were ever traversed, the rocks now beginning to assume a loftier
and more majestic appearance, and to glisten with snows.  I
had proposed passing a day or two at Inspruck, visiting the
castle of Ambras, and examining Count Eysenberg’s cabinet,
enriched with the rarest productions of the mineral kingdom, and
a complete collection of the moths and flies peculiar to the
Tyrol; but, upon my arrival, the azure of the skies and the
brightness of the sunshine inspired me with an irresistible wish
of hastening to Italy.  I was now too near the object of my
journey, to delay possession any longer than absolutely
necessary; so, casting a transient look on Maximilian’s
tomb, and the bronze statues of Tyrolese Counts and worthies,
solemnly ranged in the church of the Franciscans, set immediately
off.

We crossed a broad noble street, terminated by a triumphal
arch, and were driven along the road to the foot of a mountain
waving with fields of corn, and variegated with wood and
vineyards, encircling lawns of the finest verdure, scattered over
with white houses glistening in the sun.  Upon ascending the
mount, and beholding a vast range of prospects of a similar
character, I almost repented my impatience, and looked down with
regret upon the cupolas and steeples we were leaving
behind.  But the rapid succession of lovely and romantic
scenes soon effaced the former from my memory.

Our road, the smoothest in the world (though hewn in the bosom
of rocks), by its sudden turns and windings, gave us, every
instant, opportunities of discovering new villages, and forests
rising beyond forests; green spots in the midst of wood, high
above on the mountains, and cottages perched on the edge of
promontories.  Down, far below, in the chasm, amidst a
confusion of pines and fragments of stone, rages the torrent Inn,
which fills the country far and wide with a perpetual
murmur.  Sometimes we descended to its brink, and crossed
over high bridges; sometimes mounted half-way up the cliffs, till
its roar and agitation became, through distance,
inconsiderable.

After a long ascent, the shades of evening reposing in the
valleys, and the upland snows still tinged with a vivid red, we
reached Schönberg, a village well worthy of its appellation:
and then, twilight drawing over us, began to descend.  We
could now but faintly discover the opposite mountains, veined
with silver rills, when we came once more to the banks of the
Inn.  This turbulent stream accompanied us all the way to
Steinach, and broke by its continual roar the stillness of the
night, which had finished half its course before we were settled
to rest.

July
28
th
.—I rose early to scent the
fragrance of the vegetation, bathed in a shower which had lately
fallen, and looking around me, saw nothing but crags hanging over
crags, and the rocky shores of the stream, still dark with the
shade of the mountains.  The small opening in which Steinach
is situated, terminates in a gloomy strait, scarce leaving room
for the road and the torrent, which does not understand being
thwarted, and will force its way, let the pines grow ever so
thick, or the rocks be ever so considerable.

Notwithstanding the forbidding air of this narrow dell,
Industry has contrived to enliven its steeps with habitations, to
raise water by means of a wheel, and to cover the surface of the
rocks with soil.  By this means large crops of oats and flax
are produced, and most of the huts have gardens adjoining, which
are filled with poppies, seeming to thrive in this parched
situation.

“Urit enim lini campum seges, urit
avenæ,

Urunt Lethæo perfusa papavera somno.”

The farther we advanced in the dell, the larger were the
plantations which discovered themselves.  For what purpose
these gaudy flowers meet with such encouragement, I had neither
time nor language to inquire; the mountaineers stuttering a
gibberish unintelligible even to Germans.  Probably opium is
extracted from them; or, perhaps, if you love a conjecture,
Morpheus has transferred his abode from the Cimmerians, and has
perceived a cavern somewhere or other in the recesses of these
endless mountains.  Poppies, you know, in poetic travels,
always denote the skirts of his soporific reign, and I
don’t remember a region better calculated for undisturbed
repose than the narrow clefts and gullies which run up amongst
these rocks, lost in vapours impervious to the sun, and moistened
by rills and showers, whose continual tricklings inspire a
drowsiness not easily to be resisted.  Add to these
circumstances the waving of the pines, with the hum of bees
seeking their food in the crevices, and you will have as sleepy a
region as that in which Spenser and Ariosto have placed the
nodding deity.

At present, I must confess, I should not dislike submitting to
his empire, for a few months or years, just as it might happen,
whilst Europe is distracted by demons of revenge and war; whilst
they are strangling at Venice, and tearing each other to pieces
in unhappy London; whilst Etna and Vesuvius give signs of
uncommon wrath; America welters in her blood; and almost every
quarter of the globe is filled with carnage and
devastation.  This is the moment to humble ourselves before
the God of Sleep; to beseech him to open his dusky portals; and
admit us into the repose of his retired kingdom.  If you are
inclined to become a suppliant, hasten to the Tyrol, and we will
search together about the mountains, traverse the poppy-meads,
and look into every chasm and fissure that excludes daylight, in
hopes of discovering the mansion of repose.  Then when we
have found this corner (or I think our search will be successful)
Morpheus will give us an approving nod, and beckon us in silence
to couch, where, soon lulled by the murmurs of the place, we
shall sink into oblivion and tranquillity.  But we may as
well keep our eyes open for the present, till we have made this
important discovery, and look at the beautiful country round
Brixen, whither I arrived in the cool of the evening, and
breathed the freshness of a garden, immediately beneath my
window.  The thrushes, warbling amongst its shades, saluted
me, the moment I awoke next morning.

July
29
th
.—We proceeded over fertile
mountains to Bolsano.  Here first I noticed the rocks cut
into terraces, thick set with melons and Indian corn; gardens of
fig-trees and pomegranates hanging over walls, clustered with
fruit; amidst them, a little pleasant cot, shaded by
cypresses.  In the evening we perceived several further
indications of approaching Italy; and after sunset the Adige,
rolling its full tide between precipices, which looked awful in
the dusk.  Myriads of fire-flies sparkled amongst the shrubs
on the bank.  I traced the course of these exotic insects by
their blue light, now rising to the summits of the trees, now
sinking to the ground and associating with vulgar
glow-worms.  We had opportunities enough to remark their
progress, since we travelled all night; such being my impatience
to reach the promised land!

Morning dawned just as we saw Trent dimly before us.  I
slept a few hours, then set out again (July 30th), after the
heats were in some degree abated, and leaving Bergine, where the
peasants were feasting before their doors, in their holiday
dresses, with red pinks stuck in their ears instead of rings, and
their necks surrounded with coral of the same colour, we came
through a woody valley to the banks of a lake, filled with the
purest and most transparent water, which loses itself in shady
creeks, amongst hills robed with verdure from their bases to
their summits.

The shores present one continual shrubbery, interspersed with
knots of larches and slender almonds, starting from the
underwood.  A cornice of rock runs round the whole, except
where the trees descend to the very brink, and dip their boughs
in the water.

It was five o’clock when I caught the sight of this
unsuspected lake, and the evening shadows stretched nearly across
it.  Gaining a very rapid ascent, we looked down upon its
placid bosom, and saw several airy peaks rising above the tufted
foliage of the groves around.  I quitted the contemplation
of them with regret, and, in a few hours, arrived at Borgo di
Volsugano, the scenes of the lake still present before the eye of
my fancy.

July
31
st
.—My heart beat quick when I saw
some hills, not very distant, which I was told lay in the
Venetian State, and I thought an age, at least, had elapsed
before we were passing their base.  The road was never
formed to delight an impatient traveller; loose pebbles and
rolling stones render it, in the highest degree, tedious and
jolting.  I should not have spared my execrations, had it
not traversed a picturesque valley, overgrown with juniper, and
strewed with fragments of rock, precipitated, long since, from
the surrounding eminences, blooming with cyclamens.

I clambered up several of these crags,

“fra gli
odoriferi ginepri,”

to gather the flowers I have just mentioned, and found them
deliciously scented.  Fratillarias, and the most gorgeous
flies, many of which I here noticed for the first time, were
fluttering about and expanding their wings to the sun.
There is no describing the numbers I beheld, nor their gaily
varied colouring.  I could not find in my heart to destroy
their felicity; to scatter their bright plumage and snatch them
for ever from the realms of light and flowers.  Had I been
less compassionate, I should have gained credit with that
respectable corps, the torturers of butterflies; and might,
perhaps, have enriched their cabinets with some unknown
captives.  However, I left them imbibing the dews of heaven,
in free possession of their native rights; and having changed
horses at Tremolano, entered at length my long-desired Italy.

The pass is rocky and tremendous, guarded by a fortress
(Covalo), in possession of the Empress Queen, and only fit, one
should think, to be inhabited by her eagles.  There is no
attaining this exalted hold but by the means of a cord let down
many fathoms by the soldiers, who live in dens and caverns, which
serve also as arsenals, and magazines for powder; whose mysteries
I declined prying into, their approach being a little too
aërial for my earthly frame.  A black vapour, tinging
their entrance, completed the terror of the prospect, which I
shall never forget.

For two or three leagues it continued much in the same style;
cliffs, nearly perpendicular, on both sides, and the Brenta
foaming and thundering below.  Beyond, the rocks began to be
mantled with vines and gardens.  Here and there a cottage
shaded with mulberries made its appearance, and we often
discovered, on the banks of the river, ranges of white buildings,
with courts and awnings, beneath which vast numbers were employed
in manufacturing silk.  As we advanced, the stream gradually
widened, and the rocks receded; woods were more frequent and
cottages thicker strown.

About five in the evening, we had left the country of crags
and precipices, of mists and cataracts, and were entering the
fertile territory of the Bassanese.  It was now I beheld
groves of olives, and vines clustering the summits of the tallest
elms; pomegranates in every garden, and vases of citron and
orange before almost every door.  The softness and
transparency of the air soon told me I was arrived in happier
climates; and I felt sensations of joy and novelty run through my
veins, upon beholding this smiling land of groves and verdure
stretched out before me.  A few glooming vapours, I can
hardly call them clouds, rested upon the extremities of the
landscape; and, through their medium, the sun cast an oblique and
dewy ray.  Peasants were returning homeward from the
cultivated hillocks and corn-fields, singing as they went, and
calling to each other over the hills; whilst the women were
milking goats before the wickets of the cottages, and preparing
their country fare.

I left them enjoying it, and soon beheld the ancient ramparts
and cypresses of Bassano; whose classic appearance recalled the
memory of former times, and answered exactly the ideas I had
pictured to myself of Italian edifices.  Though encompassed
by walls and turrets, neither soldiers nor custom-house officers
start out from their concealment, to question and molest a weary
traveller, for such are the blessings of the Venetian State, at
least of the Terra Firma provinces, that it does not contain, I
believe, above four regiments.  Istria, Dalmatia, and the
maritime frontiers, are more formidably guarded, as they touch,
you know, the whiskers of the Turkish empire.

Passing under a Doric gateway, we crossed the chief part of
the town in the way to our locanda, pleasantly situated, and
commanding a level green, where people walk and eat ices by
moonlight.  On the right, the Franciscan church and convent,
half hid in the religious gloom of pine and cypress; to the left,
a perspective of walls and towers rising from the turf, and
marking it, when I arrived, with long shadows; in front, where
the lawn terminates, meadow, wood, and garden run quite to the
base of the mountains.

Twilight coming on, this beautiful spot swarmed with people,
sitting in circles upon the grass, refreshing themselves with
cooling liquors or lounging upon the bank beneath the
towers.  They looked so free and happy that I longed to be
acquainted with them; and by the interposition of a polite
Venetian (who, though a perfect stranger, showed me the most
engaging marks of attention), was introduced to a group of the
principal inhabitants.  Our conversation ended in a promise
to meet the next evening at a country house about a league from
Bassano, and then to return together and sing to the praise of
Pacchierotti, their idol, as well as mine.

You can have no idea what pleasure we mutually found in being
of the same faith, and believing in one singer; nor can you
imagine what effects that musical divinity produced at Padua,
where he performed a few years ago, and threw his audience into
such raptures, that it was some time before they recovered.
One in particular, a lady of distinction, fainted away the
instant she caught the pathetic accents of his voice, and was
near dying a martyr to its melody.  La Contessa Roberti, who
sings in the truest taste, gave me a detail of the whole
affair.  “Egli ha fatto veramente un fanatismo a
Padua,” was her expression.  I assured her we were not
without idolatry in England, upon his account; but that in this,
as well as in other articles of belief, there were many
abominable heretics.

August
1
st
.—The whole morning not a soul
stirred who could avoid it.  Those who were so active and
lively the night before, were now stretched languidly upon their
couches.  Being to the full as idly disposed, I sat down and
wrote some of this dreaming epistle; then feasted upon figs and
melons; then got under the shade of the cypress, and slumbered
till evening, only waking to dine, and take some ice.

The sun declining apace, I hastened to my engagement at
Mosolente (for so is the villa called), placed on a verdant hill
encircled by others as lovely, and consisting of three light
pavilions connected by porticos: just such as we admire in the
fairy scenes of an opera.  A vast flight of steps leads to
the summit, where Signora Roberti and her friends received me
with a grace and politeness that can never want a place in my
memory.  We rambled over all the apartments of this
agreeable edifice, characterised by airiness and
simplicity.  The pavement incrusted with a composition as
cool and polished as marble; the windows, doors, and balconies
adorned with silvered, iron work, commanding scenes of meads and
woodlands that extend to the shores of the Adriatic; spires and
cypresses rising above the levels; and the hazy mountains beyond
Padua, diversifying the expanse, form altogether a landscape
which the elegant imagination of Horizonti never exceeded.
Beyond the villa, a tumble of hillocks present themselves in a
variety of forms, with dips and hollows between, scattered over
with leafy trees and vines dangling in continued garlands.

I gazed on this rural view till it faded in the dusk; then
returning to Bassano, repaired to an illuminated hall, and had
the felicity of hearing La Signora Roberti sing the very air
which had excited such transport at Padua.  As soon as she
had ended, and that I could hear no more those affecting sounds,
which had held me silent and almost breathless for several
moments, a band of various instruments stationed in the open
street began a lively symphony, which would have delighted me at
any other time; but now, I wished them a thousand leagues away,
so melancholy an impression did the air I had been listening to
leave on my mind.

At midnight I took leave of my obliging hosts, who were just
setting out for Padua.  They gave me a thousand kind
invitations, and I hope some future day to accept them.

August
2
nd
.—Our route to Venice lay
winding about the variegated plains I had surveyed from
Mosolente; and after dining at Treviso we came in two hours and a
half to Mestre, between grand villas and gardens peopled with
statues.  Embarking our baggage at the last-mentioned place,
we stepped into a gondola, whose even motion was very agreeable
after the jolts of a chaise.  Stretched beneath the awning,
I enjoyed at my ease the freshness of the gales, and the sight of
the waters.  We were soon out of the canal of Mestre,
terminated by an isle which contains a cell dedicated to the Holy
Virgin, peeping out of a thicket from whence spire up two tall
cypresses.  Its bells tingled as we passed along and dropped
some paolis into a net tied at the end of a pole stretched out to
us for that purpose.

As soon as we had doubled the cape of this diminutive island,
an azure expanse of sea opened to our view, the domes and towers
of Venice rising from its bosom.  Now we began to
distinguish Murano, St. Michele, St. Giorgio in Alga, and several
other islands, detached from the grand cluster, which I hailed as
old acquaintances; innumerable prints and drawings having long
since made their shapes familiar.  Still gliding forward,
the sun casting his last gleams across the waves, and reddening
the different towers, we every moment distinguished some new
church or palace in the city, suffused with the evening rays, and
reflected with all their glow of colouring from the surface of
the waters.

The air was still; the sky cloudless; a faint wind just
breathing upon the deep, lightly bore its surface against the
steps of a chapel in the island of Saint Secondo, and waved the
veil before its portal, as we rowed by and coasted the walls of
its garden, overhung with fig-trees and topped with Italian
pines.  The convent discovers itself through their branches,
built in a style somewhat morisco, and level with the sea, except
where the garden intervenes.

Here, meditation may indulge her reveries in the midst of the
surges, and walk in cloisters, alone vocal with the whispers of
the pine.  I passed this consecrated spot soon after sunset,
when daylight was expiring in the west, and when the distant
woods of Fusina were lost in the haze of the horizon.

We were now drawing very near the city, and a confused hum
began to interrupt the evening stillness; gondolas were
continually passing and repassing, and the entrance of the Canal
Reggio, with all its stir and bustle, lay before us.  Our
gondoliers turned with much address through a crowd of boats and
barges that blocked up the way, and rowed smoothly by the side of
a broad pavement, covered with people in all dresses and of all
nations.

Leaving the Palazzo Pesaro, a noble structure with two rows of
arcades and a superb rustic, behind, we were soon landed before
the Leon Bianco, which being situated in one of the broadest
parts of the grand canal, commands a most striking assemblage of
buildings.  I have no terms to describe the variety of
pillars, of pediments, of mouldings, and cornices, some Grecian,
others Saracenical, that adorn these edifices, of which the
pencil of Canaletti conveys so perfect an idea as to render all
verbal description superfluous.  At one end of this grand
perspective appears the Rialto; the sweep of the canal conceals
the other.

The rooms of our hotel are as spacious and cheerful as I could
desire; a lofty hall, or rather gallery, painted with grotesque
in a very good style, perfectly clean, floored with the stucco
composition I have mentioned above, divides the house, and admits
a refreshing current of air.  Several windows near the
ceiling look into this vast apartment, which serves in lieu of a
court, and is rendered perfectly luminous by a glazed arcade,
thrown open to catch the breezes.  Through it I passed to a
balcony which impends over the canal, and is twined round with
plants forming a green festoon springing from two large vases of
orange-trees placed at each end.  Here I established myself
to enjoy the cool, and observe, as well as the dusk would permit,
the variety of figures shooting by in their gondolas.

As night approached, innumerable tapers glimmered through the
awnings before the windows.  Every boat had its lantern, and
the gondolas moving rapidly along were followed by tracks of
light, which gleamed and played upon the waters.  I was
gazing at these dancing fires when the sounds of music were
wafted along the canals, and as they grew louder and louder, an
illuminated barge, filled with musicians, issued from the Rialto,
and stopping under one of the palaces, began a serenade, which
was clamorous and suspended all conversation in the galleries and
porticos; till, rowing slowly away, it was heard no more.
The gondoliers catching the air, imitated its cadences, and were
answered by others at a distance, whose voices, echoed by the
arch of the bridge, acquired a plaintive and interesting
tone.  I retired to rest, full of the sound; and long after
I was asleep, the melody seemed to vibrate in my ear.

August
3
rd
.—It was not five o’clock
before I was aroused by a loud din of voices and splashing of
water under my balcony.  Looking out, I beheld the grand
canal so entirely covered with fruits and vegetables, on rafts
and in barges, that I could scarcely distinguish a wave.
Loads of grapes, peaches, and melons arrived, and disappeared in
an instant, for every vessel was in motion; and the crowds of
purchasers hurrying from boat to boat, formed one of the
liveliest pictures imaginable.  Amongst the multitudes, I
remarked a good many whose dress and carriage announced something
above the common rank; and upon inquiry I found they were noble
Venetians, just come from their casinos, and met to refresh
themselves with fruit, before they retired to sleep for the
day.

Whilst I was observing them, the sun began to colour the
balustrades of the palaces, and the pure exhilarating air of the
morning drawing me abroad, I procured a gondola, laid in my
provision of bread and grapes, and was rowed under the Rialto,
down the grand canal, to the marble steps of S. Maria della
Salute, erected by the Senate in performance of a vow to the Holy
Virgin, who begged off a terrible pestilence in 1630.  I
gazed, delighted with its superb frontispiece and dome, relieved
by a clear blue sky.  To criticize columns or pediments of
the different façades, would be time lost; since one
glance upon the worst view that has been taken of them, conveys a
far better idea than the most elaborate description.  The
great bronze portal opened whilst I was standing on the steps
which lead to it, and discovered the interior of the dome, where
I expatiated in solitude; no mortal appearing except an old
priest who trimmed the lamps, and muttered a prayer before the
high altar, still wrapped in shadows.  The sunbeams began to
strike against the windows of the cupola just as I left the
church, and was wafted across the waves to the spacious platform
in front of St. Giorgio Maggiore, by far the most perfect and
beautiful edifice my eyes ever beheld.

When my first transport was a little subsided, and I had
examined the graceful design of each particular ornament, and
united the just proportion and grand effect of the whole in my
mind, I planted my umbrella on the margin of the sea, and
reclining under its shade, my feet dangling over the waters,
viewed the vast range of palaces, of porticos, of towers, opening
on every side and extending out of sight.  The Doge’s
residence and the tall columns at the entrance of the place of
St. Mark, form, together with the arcades of the public library,
the lofty Campanile and the cupolas of the ducal church, one of
the most striking groups of buildings that art can boast
of.  To behold at one glance these stately fabrics, so
illustrious in the records of former ages, before which, in the
flourishing times of the republic, so many valiant chiefs and
princes have landed, loaded with the spoils of different nations,
was a spectacle I had long and ardently desired.  I thought
of the days of Frederic Barbarossa, when looking up the piazza of
St. Mark, along which he marched in solemn procession, to cast
himself at the feet of Alexander the Third, and pay a tardy
homage to St. Peter’s successor.  Here were no longer
those splendid fleets that attended his progress; one solitary
galeass was all I beheld, anchored opposite the palace of the
Doge, and surrounded by crowds of gondolas, whose sable hues
contrasted strongly with its vermilion oars and shining
ornaments.  A party-coloured multitude was continually
shifting from one side of the piazza to the other; whilst
senators and magistrates in long black robes were already
arriving to fill their respective charges.

I contemplated the busy scene from my peaceful platform, where
nothing stirred but aged devotees creeping to their devotions;
and, whilst I remained thus calm and tranquil, heard the distant
buzz and rumour of the town.  Fortunately a length of waves
rolled between me and its tumults; so that I ate my grapes, and
read Metastasio, undisturbed by officiousness or curiosity.
When the sun became too powerful, I entered the nave, and
applauded the genius of Palladio.

After I had admired the masterly structure of the roof and the
lightness of its arches, my eyes naturally directed themselves to
the pavement of white and ruddy marble, polished, and reflecting
like a mirror the columns which rise from it.  Over this I
walked to a door that admitted me into the principal quadrangle
of the convent, surrounded by a cloister supported on Ionic
pillars, beautifully proportioned.  A flight of stairs opens
into the court, adorned with balustrades and pedestals,
sculptured with elegance truly Grecian.  This brought me to
the refectory, where the chef-d’œuvre of Paul
Veronese, representing the marriage of Cana in Galilee, was the
first object that presented itself.  I never beheld so
gorgeous a group of wedding garments before; there is every
variety of fold and plait that can possibly be imagined.
The attitudes and countenances are more uniform, and the guests
appear a very genteel, decent sort of people, well used to the
mode of their times and accustomed to miracles.

Having examined this fictitious repast, I cast a look on a
long range of tables covered with very excellent realities, which
the monks were coming to devour with energy, if one might judge
from their appearance.  These sons of penitence and
mortification possess one of the most spacious islands of the
whole cluster, a princely habitation, with gardens and open
porticos, that engross every breath of air; and, what adds not a
little to the charms of their abode, is the liberty of making
excursions from it, whenever they have a mind.

The republic, wisely jealous of ecclesiastical influence,
connives at these amusing rambles, and, by encouraging the
liberty of monks and churchmen, prevents their appearing too
sacred and important in the eyes of the people, who have frequent
proofs of their being mere flesh and blood, and that of the
frailest composition.  Had the rest of Italy been of the
same opinion, and profited as much by Fra Paolo’s maxims,
some of its fairest fields would not, at this moment, lie
uncultivated, and its ancient spirit might have revived.
However, I can scarcely think the moment far distant, when it
will assert its natural prerogatives, awake from its ignoble
slumber, and look back upon the tiara, with all its host of idle
fears and scaring phantoms, as the offspring of a distempered
dream.  Scarce a sovereign supports any longer this vain
illusion, except the old woman of Hungary, and as soon as her dim
eyes are closed we shall probably witness great events.
[156]

Full of prophecies and bodings, I moved slowly out of the
cloisters; and, gaining my gondola, arrived, I know not how, at
the flights of steps which lead to the Redenptore, a structure so
simple and elegant, that I thought myself entering an antique
temple, and looked about for the statue of the God of Delphi, or
some other graceful divinity.  A huge crucifix of bronze
soon brought me to times present.

The charm being thus dissolved, I began to perceive the shapes
of rueful martyrs peeping out of the niches around, and the bushy
beards of Capuchin friars wagging before the altars.  These
good fathers had decorated their church, according to custom,
with orange and citron trees, placed between the pilasters of the
arcades; and on grand festivals, it seems, they turn the whole
church into a bower, strew the pavement with leaves, and festoon
the dome with flowers.

I left them occupied with their plants and their
devotions.  It was midday, and I begged to be rowed to some
woody island, where I might dine in shade and tranquillity.
My gondoliers shot off in an instant; but, though they went at a
very rapid rate, I wished to fly faster, and getting into a bark
with six oars, swept along the waters, soon left the Zecca and
San Marco behind; and, launching into the plains of shining sea,
saw turret after turret, and isle after isle, fleeting before
me.  A pale greenish light ran along the shores of the
distant continent, whose mountains seemed to catch the motion of
my boat, and to fly with equal celerity.

I had not much time to contemplate the beautiful effects on
the waters—the emerald and purple hues which gleamed along
their surface.  Our prow struck, foaming, against the walls
of the Carthusian garden, before I recollected where I was, or
could look attentively around me.  Permission being
obtained, I entered this cool retirement, and putting aside with
my hands the boughs of fig-trees and pomegranates, got under an
ancient bay, near which several tall pines lift themselves up to
the breezes.  I listened to the conversation they held, with
a wind just flown from Greece, and charged, as well as I could
understand this airy language, with many affectionate
remembrances from their relations on Mount Ida.

I reposed amidst bay leaves, fanned by a constant air, till it
pleased the fathers to send me some provisions, with a basket of
fruit and wine.  Two of them would wait upon me, and ask ten
thousand questions about Lord George Gordon, and the American
war.  I, who was deeply engaged with the winds, and fancied
myself hearing these rapid travellers relate their adventures,
wished my interrogators in purgatory, and pleaded ignorance of
the Italian language.  This circumstance extricated me from
my difficulties, and procured me a long interval of repose.

The rustling of the pines had the same effect as the murmurs
of other old story-tellers, and I slept undisturbed till the
people without, in the boat (who wondered not a little, I dare
say, what the deuce was become of me within), began a sort of
chorus in parts, full of such plaintive modulation, that I still
thought myself under the influence of a dream, and, half in this
world and half in the other, believed, like the heroes of Fingal,
that I had caught the music of the spirits of the hill.

When I was thoroughly convinced of the reality of these
sounds, I moved towards the shore from whence they proceeded: a
glassy sea lay full before me; no gale ruffled the expanse; every
breath was subsided, and I beheld the sun go down in all its
sacred calm.  You have experienced the sensations this
moment inspires; imagine what they must have been in such a
scene, and accompanied with a melody so simple and
pathetic.  I stepped into my boat, and instead of
encouraging the speed of the gondoliers, begged them to abate
their ardour, and row me lazily home.  They complied, and we
were near an hour reaching the platform before the ducal palace,
thronged as usual with a variety of nations.  I mixed a
moment with the crowd; then directed my steps to the great
mosque,—I ought to say the church of St. Mark; but really
its cupolas, slender pinnacles, and semicircular arches, have so
oriental an appearance, as to excuse this appellation.  I
looked a moment at the four stately coursers of bronze and gold
that adorn the chief portal, and then took in, at one glance, the
whole extent of the square, with its towers and standards.
So noble an assemblage never met my eyes.  I envied the good
fortune of Petrarch, who describes, in one of his letters, a
tournament held in this princely opening.

Many are the festivals which have been here celebrated.
When Henry the Third left Poland to mount the throne of France,
he passed through Venice, and found the republic waiting to
receive him in their famous square, which by means of an awning
stretched from the balustrades of opposite palaces, was
metamorphosed into a vast saloon, sparkling with artificial
stars, and spread with the richest carpets of the East.
What a magnificent idea!  The ancient Romans, in the zenith
of power and luxury, never conceived a greater.  It is to
them the Venetians are indebted for the hint, since we read of
the Coliseo and Pompey’s theatre being sometimes covered
with transparent canvas, to defend the spectators from the heat
or sudden rain, and to tint the scene with soft agreeable
colours, like the hues of the declining sun.

Having enjoyed the general perspective of the piazza, I began
to enter into particulars, and examine the bronze pedestals of
the three standards before the great church, designed by
Sansovino in the true spirit of the antique, and covered with
relievos, at the same time bold and elegant.  It is also to
this celebrated architect we are indebted for the stately
façade of the Proccuratie nuove, which forms one side of
the square, and presents an uninterrupted series of arcades and
marble columns exquisitely wrought.  Opposite this
magnificent range appears another line of palaces, whose
architecture, though far removed from the Grecian purity of
Sansovino, impresses veneration, and completes the pomp of the
view.

There is something strange and singular in the tower, which
rises distinct from the smooth pavement of the square, a little
to the left as you stand before the chief entrance of St.
Mark’s.  The design is rather barbarous, and
terminates in uncouth and heavy pyramids; yet in spite of these
defects it struck me with awe.  A beautiful building called
the Loggetta, and which serves as a guard-house during the
convocation of the grand council, decorates its base.
Nothing can be more enriched, more finished than this structure;
which, though far from diminutive, is in a manner lost at the
foot of the Campanile.  This enormous mass seems to promise
a very long duration, and will probably carry down the fame of
St. Mark and his Lion to the latest posterity.  Both appear
in great state towards its summit, and have nothing superior, but
an archangel perched on the topmost pinnacle, and pointing to the
skies.  The dusk prevented my remarking the various
sculptures with which the Loggetta is crowded.

Crossing the ample space between this elegant edifice and the
ducal palace, I passed through a labyrinth of pillars and entered
the principal court, of which nothing but the great outline was
visible at so late an hour.  Two reservoirs of bronze, rich
with sculptured foliage, diversify the area.  In front a
magnificent flight of steps presents itself, by which the
senators ascend through vast and solemn corridors, which lead to
the interior of the edifice.  The colossal statues of Mars
and Neptune guard the entrance, and have given the appellation of

scala dei geganti
to the steps below, which I mounted not
without respect; and, leaning against the balustrades, formed
like the rest of the building of the rarest marbles, adored the
tutelary divinities.

My devotions were shortly interrupted by one of the sbirri, or
officers of police, who take their stands after sunset before the
avenues of the palace, and who told me the gates were upon the
point of being closed.  So, hurrying down the steps, I left
half my vows unpaid and a million of delicate sculptures
unexplored; for every pilaster, every frieze, every entablature,
is incrusted with porphyry, verde antique, or some other curious
marble, carved into as many grotesque wreaths and mouldings as we
admire in the loggios of Raffaello.  The various portals,
the strange projections, the length of cloisters; in short, the
noble irregularity of these imperial piles, delighted me beyond
idea; and I was sorry to be forced to abandon them so soon,
especially as the twilight, which bats and owls love not better
than I do, enlarged every portico, lengthened every colonnade,
and increased the dimensions of the whole, just as imagination
desired.  This faculty would have had full scope had I but
remained an hour longer.  The moon would then have gleamed
upon the gigantic forms of Mars and Neptune, and discovered the
statues of ancient heroes emerging from the gloom of their
niches.

Such an interesting assemblage of objects, such regal scenery,
with the reflection that half their ornaments once contributed to
the decoration of Athens, transported me beyond myself.  The
sbirri thought me distracted.  True enough, I was stalking
proudly about like an actor in an ancient Grecian tragedy,
lifting up his hands to the consecrated fanes and images around,
expecting the reply of his attendant chorus, and declaiming the
first verses of Œdipus Tyrannus.

These fits of enthusiasm were hardly subsided, when I issued
from the gates of the palace into the great square, which
received a faint gleam from its casinos and palaces, just
beginning to be lighted up, and become the resort of pleasure and
dissipation.  Numbers were walking in parties upon the
pavement; some sought the shade of the porticos with their
favourites; others were earnestly engaged in conversation, and
filled the gay illuminated apartments, where they resorted to
drink coffee and sorbet, with laughter and merriment.  A
thoughtless giddy transport prevailed; for, at this hour,
anything like restraint seems perfectly out of the question; and
however solemn a magistrate or senator may appear in the day, at
night he lays up wig and robe and gravity to sleep together, runs
intriguing about in his gondola, takes the reigning sultana under
his arm, and so rambles half over the town, which grows gayer and
gayer as the day declines.

Many of the noble Venetians have a little suite of apartments
in some out-of-the-way corner, near the grand piazza, of which
their families are totally ignorant.  To these they skulk in
the dusk, and revel undisturbed with the companions of their
pleasures.  Jealousy itself cannot discover the alleys, the
winding passages, the unsuspected doors, by which these retreats
are accessible.  Many an unhappy lover, whose mistress
disappears on a sudden with some fortunate rival, has searched
for her haunts in vain.  The gondoliers themselves, though
the prime managers of intrigue, are scarce ever acquainted with
these interior cabinets.  When a gallant has a mind to
pursue his adventures with mystery, he rows to the piazza, orders
his bark to wait, meets his goddess in the crowd, and vanishes
from all beholders.  Surely, Venice is the city in the
universe best calculated for giving scope to the observations of
a devil upon two sticks.  What a variety of lurking-places
would one stroke of his crutch uncover!

Whilst the higher ranks were solacing themselves in their
casinos, the rabble were gathered in knots round the strollers
and mountebanks, singing and scaramouching in the middle of the
square.  I observed a great number of Orientals amongst the
crowd, and heard Turkish and Arabic muttering in every
corner.  There the Sclavonian dialect predominated; there
some Grecian jargon, almost unintelligible.  Had St.
Mark’s church been the wondrous tower, and its piazza the
chief square, of the city of Babylon, there could scarcely have
been a greater confusion of languages.

The novelty of the scene afforded me no small share of
amusement, and I wandered about from group to group, and from one
strange exotic to another, asking and being asked innumerable
ridiculous questions, and settling the politics of London and
Constantinople, almost in the same breath.  This instant, I
found myself in a circle of grave Armenian priests and jewellers;
the next amongst Greeks and Dalmatians, who accosted me with the
smoothest compliments, and gave proof that their reputation for
pliability and address was not ill-founded.

I was entering into a grand harum-scarum discourse with some
Russian Counts or Princes, or whatever you please, just landed
with dwarfs, and footmen, and governors, and staring, like me,
about them, when Mad. de R. arrived, to whom I had the happiness
of being recommended.  She very obligingly presented me to
some of the most distinguished of the Venetian families at their
great casino, which looks into the piazza, and consists of five
or six rooms, fitted up in a gay flimsy taste, neither rich nor
elegant, where were a great many lights, and a great many ladies
negligently dressed, their hair falling very freely about them,
and innumerable adventures written in their eyes.  The
gentlemen were lolling upon the sofas or lounging about the
apartments.

The whole assembly seemed upon the verge of gaping, till
coffee was carried round.  This magic beverage diffused a
temporary animation; and, for a moment or two, conversation moved
on with a degree of pleasing extravagance; but the flash was soon
dissipated, and nothing remained save cards and stupidity.

In the intervals of shuffling and dealing, some talked over
the affairs of the grand council with less reserve than I
expected; and two or three of them asked some feeble questions
about the late tumults in London: as much, however, through
indolence and forgetfulness, I should conjecture, as from any
political motive, for I don’t believe all those wise
stories, which some travellers have propagated, of Venetian
subtlety and profound silence.  They might have reigned
during the dark periods of the republic, but at this moment the
veil is rent in fifty places; and without any wonderful
penetration, the debates of the senate are discoverable.
There doubtless was a time when, society being greatly divided,
and little communication subsisting among the nobles, secrets
were invariably kept; but since the establishment of casinos,
which the ladies rule, where chit-chat and tittle-tattle are for
ever going forwards, who can preserve a rigorous taciturnity upon
any subject in the universe?  It was one o’clock
before all the company were assembled, and I left them at three,
still dreaming over their coffee and card-tables.  Trieze is
their favourite game:
uno
,
due
,
tre
,

quatro
,
cinque
,
fante
,
cavallo
are
eternally repeated; the apartments echoed no other sound.

No lively people could endure such monotony; yet I have been
told the Venetians are remarkably spirited, and so eager in the
pursuit of amusement as hardly to allow themselves any
sleep.  Some, for instance, after declaiming in the Senate,
walking an hour in the square, and fidgeting about from one
casino to another till morning dawns, will get into a gondola,
row across the Lagunes, take the post to Mestre or Fusina, and
jumble over craggy pavements to Treviso, breakfast in haste, and
rattle back again as if the devil were charioteer: by eleven the
party is restored to Venice, resumes robe and periwig, and goes
to council.

This may be very true, and yet I will never cite the Venetians
as examples of vivacity.  Their nerves, unstrung by disease
and the consequences of early debaucheries, impede all lively
flow of spirits in its course, and permit at best but a few
moments of a false and feverish activity.  The approaches of
rest, forced back by an immoderate use of coffee, render them,
too, weak and listless, and the facility of being wafted from
place to place in a gondola, adds not a little to their
indolence.  In short, I can scarcely regard their Eastern
neighbours in a more lazy light; and am apt to imagine that
instead of slumbering less than other people, they pass their
lives in one perpetual doze.

August
4
th
.—The heats were so excessive in
the night, that I thought myself several times on the point of
suffocation, tossed about like a wounded fish, and dreamt of the
devil and Senegal.  Towards sunrise, a faint breeze restored
me to life and reason.  I slumbered till late in the day,
and the moment I was fairly awake, ordered my gondolier to row
out to the main ocean, that I might plunge into its waves, and
hear and see nothing but waters around me.

We shot off, wound amongst a number of sheds, shops, churches,
casinos, and palaces, growing immediately out of the canals,
without any apparent foundation.  No quay, no terrace, not
even a slab is to be seen before the doors; one step brings you
from the hall into the bark, and the vestibules of the stateliest
structures lie open to the waters, and level with them.  I
observed several, as I glided along, supported by rows of
well-proportioned pillars, adorned with terms and vases, beyond
which the eye generally discovers a grand court, and sometimes a
garden.

In about half an hour, we had left the thickest cluster of
isles behind, and, coasting the Place of St. Mark opposite to San
Giorgio Maggiore, whose elegant frontispiece was painted on the
calm waters, launched into the blue expanse of sea, from which
rise the Chartreuse and two or three other woody islands.  I
hailed the spot where I had passed such a happy visionary
evening, and nodded to my friends the pines.

A few minutes more brought me to a dreary, sun-burnt shore,
stalked over by a few Sclavonian soldiers, who inhabit a castle
hard by, go regularly to an ugly unfinished church, and from
thence, it is to be hoped, to paradise; as the air of their
barracks is abominable, and kills them like blasted sheep.

Forlorn as this island appeared to me, I was told it was the
scene of the Doge’s pageantry at the feast of the
Ascension; and the very spot to which he sails in the

Bucentaur
, previously to wedding the sea.  You have
heard enough, and if ever you looked into a show-box, seen full
sufficient of this gaudy spectacle, without my enlarging upon the
topic.  I shall only say, that I was obliged to pursue,
partly, the same road as the nuptial procession, in order to
reach the beach, and was broiled and dazzled accordingly.

At last, after traversing some desert hillocks, all of a hop
with toads and locusts (amongst which English heretics have the
honour of being interred), I passed under an arch, and suddenly
the boundless plains of ocean opened to my view.  I ran to
the smooth sands, extending on both sides out of sight, cast off
my clothes, and dashed into the waves, which were coursing one
another with a gentle motion, and breaking lightly on the
shores.  The tide rolled over me as I lay floating about,
buoyed up by the water, and carried me wheresoever it
listed.  It might have borne me far out into the main, and
exposed me to a thousand perils, before I had been aware, so
totally was I abandoned to the illusion of the moment.  My
ears were filled with murmuring undecided sounds; my limbs,
stretched languidly on the surge, rose or sunk just as it swelled
or subsided.  In this passive, senseless state I remained,
till the sun cast a less intolerable light, and the fishing
vessels, lying out in the bay at a great distance, spread their
sails and were coming home.

Hastening back over the desert of locusts, I threw myself into
the gondola; and, no wind or wave opposing, was soon wafted
across to those venerable columns, so conspicuous in the Place of
St. Mark.  Directing my course immediately to the ducal
palace, I entered the grand court, ascending the Giant’s
stairs, and examined at my leisure its bas-reliefs.  Then,
taking the first guide that presented himself, I was shown along
several cloisters and corridors, sustained by innumerable
pillars, into the state apartments, which Tintoret and Paolo
Veronese have covered with the triumphs of their country.

A swarm of lawyers filled the Sala del Maggior Consiglio, and
one of the first advocates in the republic was pleading with all
his might, before a solemn row of senators.  The eyes and
ears of the assembly seemed equally affected.  Clouds of
powder and volleys of execrations issuing every instant from the
disputants, I got out of their way; and was led from hall to
hall, and from picture to picture, with exemplary
resignation.  To be sure, I was heartily tired, but behaved
with decency, having never once expressed how much I wished the
chefs-d’œuvre I had been contemplating, less smoky
and numerous.

At last, I reached once more the colonnades at the entrance,
and caught the sea-breeze in the open porticos which front San
Giorgio Maggiore.  The walls are covered in most places with
grim visages sculptured in marble, whose mouths gape for
accusations, and swallow every lie that malice and revenge can
dictate.  I wished for a few ears of the same kind,
dispersed about the Doge’s residence, to which one might
apply one’s own, and catch some account of the mysteries
within; some little dialogue between the Three Inquisitors, or
debate in the Council of Ten.

This is the tribunal which holds the wealthy nobility in
continual awe; before which they appear with trembling and
terror: and whose summons they dare not disobey.  Sometimes,
by way of clemency, it condemns its victims to perpetual
imprisonment in close, stifling cells, between the leads and
beams of the palace; or, unwilling to spill the blood of a
fellow-citizen, generously sinks them into dungeons, deep under
the canals which wash its foundations; so that, above and below,
its majesty is contaminated by the abodes of punishment.
What other sovereign could endure the idea of having his
immediate residence polluted with tears? or revel in his halls,
conscious that many of his species were consuming their hours in
lamentations above his head, and that but a few beams separated
him from the scene of their tortures?  How ever gaily
disposed, could one dance with pleasure on a pavement, beneath
which lie damp and gloomy caverns, whose inhabitants waste away
by painful degrees, and feel themselves whole years
a-dying?  Impressed by these terrible ideas, I could not
regard the palace without horror, and wished for the strength of
a thousand antediluvians, to level it with the sea, lay open the
secret recesses of punishment, and admit free gales and sunshine
into every den.

When I had thus vented my indignation, I repaired to the
statue of Neptune and invoked it to second my enterprise.
Once upon a time no deity had a freer hand at razing
cities.  His execution was renowned throughout all
antiquity, and the proudest monarchs deprecated the wrath of
ΚΡΕΙΩΝ
ΕΝΟΣΙΧΘΩΝ.
But, like the other mighty ones of ancient days, his reign is
past and his trident disregarded.  Formerly any wild spirit
found favour in the eyes of fortune, and was led along the career
of glory to the deliverance of captives and the extirpation of
monsters; but, in our degenerate times, this easy road to fame is
no longer open, and the means of producing such signal events
perplexed and difficult.

Abandoning, therefore, the sad tenants of the Piombi to their
fate, I left the courts, and stepping into my bark, was rowed
down a canal over which the lofty walls of the palace cast a
tremendous shade.  Beneath these fatal waters the dungeons I
have also been speaking of are situated.  There the wretches
lie marking the sound of the oars, and counting the free passage
of every gondola.  Above, a marble bridge, of bold majestic
architecture, joins the highest part of the prisons to the secret
galleries of the palace; from whence criminals are conducted over
the arch to a cruel and mysterious death.  I shuddered
whilst passing below; and believe it is not without cause, this
structure is named PONTE DEl SOSPIRI.  Horrors and dismal
prospects haunted my fancy upon my return.  I could not dine
in peace, so strongly was my imagination affected; but snatching
my pencil, I drew chasms and subterraneous hollows, the domain of
fear and torture, with chains, racks, wheels, and dreadful
engines, in the style of Piranesi.  About sunset I went and
refreshed myself with the cool air and cheerful scenery of the
Fondamenti nuovi, a vast quay or terrace of white marble, which
commands the whole series of isles, from San Michele’s to
Torcello,

“That rise and
glitter o’er the ambient tide.”

Nothing can be more picturesque than the groups of towers and
cupolas which they present, mixed with flat roofs and low
buildings, and now and then a pine or cypress.  Afar off, a
little woody isle, called Il Deserto, swells from the ocean and
diversifies its expanse.

When I had spent a delightful half-hour in viewing the distant
isles, M. de.  B. accompanied me to the Mendicanti, one of
the four conservatorios, which give the best musical education
conceivable to near one hundred young women.  You may
imagine how admirably those of the Mendicanti in particular are
taught, since their establishment is under Bertoni’s
direction, who breathes around him the very soul of grace and
harmony.  The chapel in which we sat to hear the oratorio
was dark and solemn; a screen of lofty pillars, formed of black
marble and highly polished, excluded the glow of the western sky,
and reflected the lamps which burn perpetually before the
altar.  Every tribune was thronged with people, whose
profound silence showed them worthy auditors of Bertoni’s
compositions.  Here were no cackling old women, or groaning
Methodists, such as infest our English churches, and scare
one’s ears with hoarse coughs accompanied by the naso
obligato.  All were still and attentive, imbibing the
plaintive notes of the voices with eagerness; and scarce a
countenance but seemed deeply affected with David’s
sorrows, the subject of the performance.  I sat retired in a
solitary tribune, and felt them as my own.  Night came on
before the last chorus was sung, and I still seem to hear its
sacred melody.

August
18
th
.—It rains; the air is
refreshed and I have courage to resume my pen, which the sultry
weather had forced to lie dormant so long.  I like this odd
town of Venice, and find every day some new amusement in rambling
about its innumerable canals and alleys.  Sometimes I go and
pry about the great church of Saint Mark, and examine the variety
of marbles and mazes of delicate sculpture with which it is
covered.  The cupola, glittering with gold, mosaic, and
paintings of half the wonders in the Apocalypse, never fails
transporting me to the period of the Eastern empire.  I
think myself in Constantinople, and expect Michael Paleologus
with all his train.  One circumstance alone prevents my
observing half the treasures of the place, and holds down my
fancy, just springing into the air: I mean the vile stench which
exhales from every recess and corner of the edifice, and which
all the altars cannot subdue.

When oppressed by this noxious atmosphere, I run up the
Campanile in the piazza, and seating myself amongst the pillars
of the gallery, breathe the fresh gales which blow from the
Adriatic; survey at my leisure all Venice beneath me, with its
azure sea, white sails, and long tracts of islands shining in the
sun.  Having thus laid in a provision of wholesome breezes,
I brave the vapours of the canals, and venture into the most
curious and murky quarters of the city, in search of Turks and
Infidels, that I may ask as many questions as I please about
Damascus and Suristan, those happy countries which nature has
covered with roses.

Asiatics find Venice very much to their liking, and all those
I conversed with allowed its customs and style of living had a
good deal of conformity to their own.  The eternal lounging
in coffee-houses and sipping of sorbets, agrees perfectly well
with the inhabitants of the Ottoman empire, who stalk about here
in their proper dresses, and smoke their own exotic pipes,
without being stared and wondered at, as in most other European
capitals.  Some few of these Orientals are communicative and
enlightened; but, generally speaking, they know nothing beyond
the rule of three, and the commonest transactions of mercantile
affairs.

The Greeks are by far a more lively generation, still
retaining their propensity to works of genius and
imagination.  Metastasio has been lately translated into
their modern jargon, and some obliging papa or other has had the
patience to put the long-winded romance of Clelia into a Grecian
dress.  I saw two or three of these volumes exposed on a
stall, under the grand arcades of the public library, as I went
one day to admire the antiques in its vestibules.

Whilst I was intent upon my occupation, a little door, I never
should have suspected, flew open, and out popped Monsieur de V.,
from a place where nothing, I believe, but broomsticks and
certain other utensils were ever before deposited.  This
gentleman, the most active investigator of Homer since the days
of the good bishop of Thessalonica, bespatters you with more
learning in a minute than others communicate in half a year;
quotes Arabic, Greek, Hebrew, Syriac, etc., with a formidable
fluency; and drove me from one end of the room to the other with
all the thunder of erudition.  Syllables fell thicker than
hail, and in an instant I found myself so weighed down and
covered, that I prayed, for mercy’s sake, to be introduced,
by way of respite, to a Laplander whom he leads about as a
curiosity; a poor, harmless, good sort of a soul, calm and
indifferent, who has acquired the words of several Oriental
languages to perfection: ideas he has, in none.

We went together to view a collection of medals in one of the
Gradanigo palaces, and two or three inestimable volumes, filled
with paintings that represent the dress of the ancient Venetians;
so that I had an opportunity of observing to perfection all the
Lapland nothingness of my companion.  What a perfect
void!  Cold and silent as the polar regions, not one passion
ever throbbed in his bosom; not one bright ray of fancy ever
glittered in his mind; without love or anger, pleasure or pain,
his days fleet smoothly along: all things considered, I must
confess I envied such comfortable apathy.

After having passed a peaceful hour in dreaming over the
medals and rarities, M. de V. was for conducting me to the
Armenian convent, but I begged to be excused, and went to S.
Giovanni e Paolo’s, a church ever celebrated in the annals
of painting, since it contains that masterpiece of Titian,
“The Martyrdom of St. Peter.”  It being a
festival, the huge Gothic pillars were covered with red damask,
and the shrines of saints and worthies glimmered with
tapers.  The dim chapels on each side the nave received a
feeble light, and discovered the tombs of ancient Doges, and the
equestrian statues of many a doughty General.  I admired
them all, but liked nothing so much as a snug bas-relief I found
out in a corner, which represents St. Mark and some other good
souls a-prosing, whilst his lion and the old serpent squabble and
scratch in the foreground of the sculpture, like cat and dog by
the fireside.  After dinner, when the shadows of domes and
palaces began lengthening across the waves, I rowed out

“On the clear
hyaline, the glassy sea,”

to observe the last sunbeams fade on the tufted gardens of the
Giudecca, and to contemplate the distant Euganean hills, once the
happiest region of Italy; where wandering nations enjoyed the
simplicity of a pastoral life, long before the arrival of
Antenor.  In those ancient times, deep forests and extensive
pastures covered the shores
[170a]
of the Adriatic,
and innumerable flocks hung on the brow of the mountains.
This golden period ended upon the incursion of the Trojans and
Heneti; who, led by Antenor, drove away the unfortunate savages,
and possessed themselves of their habitations.
[170b]
The form of the hillocks is
varied and picturesque, and the sun, sinking behind them,
suffuses their summits with tints of the brightest orange.
Scarce one evening have I failed to remark the changeful scenery
of the clouds, and to fill my mind with recollections of primeval
days and happier ages.  Night generally surprises me in the
midst of my reveries; I return, lulled in my gondola by the
murmur of waters, pass about an hour with M. de R., whose
imagination and sensibility almost equal your own; then, retire
to sleep, and dream of the Euganeans.

LETTER IX.

August
27
th
.—I am just returned from
visiting the isles of Burano, Torcello, and Mazorbo, distant
about five miles from Venice.  To these amphibious spots the
Romans, inhabitants of eastern Lombardy, fled from the ravine of
Attila; and, if we may believe Cassiodorus, there was a time when
they presented a beautiful appearance.  Beyond them, on the
coast of the Lagunes, rose the once populous city of Altina, with
its six stately gates, which Dandolo mentions.
[170c]
Its neighbourhood was scattered with
innumerable villas and temples, composing altogether a prospect
which Martial compares to Baiæ:

“Æmula
Baianis Altini littora villis.”

But this agreeable scene, like so many others, is passed
entirely away, and has left nothing, except heaps of stones and
misshapen fragments, to vouch for its former magnificence.
Two of the islands, Costanziaco and Amiano, that are imagined to
have contained the bowers and gardens of the Altinatians, have
sunk beneath the waters; those which remain are scarcely worthy
to rise above their surface.

Though I was persuaded little was left to be seen above
ground, I could not deny myself the imaginary pleasure of
treading a corner of the earth once so adorned and cultivated;
and of walking over the roofs, perhaps, of concealed halls and
undiscovered palaces.  M. de R., to whom I communicated my
ideas, entered at once into the scheme; hiring therefore a

peiotte
we took some provisions and music (to us equally
necessaries of life), and launched into the canal, between St.
Michael and Murano.

The waves coursed each other with violence, and dark clouds
hung over the grand sweep of northern mountains, whilst the west
smiled with azure and bright sunshine.  Thunder rolled
awfully at a distance, and those white and greyish birds, the
harbingers of storms, flitted frequently before our bark.
For some moments we were in doubt whether to proceed; but as we
advanced by a little dome in the Isle of St. Michael, shaped like
an ancient temple, the sky cleared, and the ocean subsiding by
degrees, soon presented a tranquil expanse, across which we were
smoothly wafted.  Our instruments played several delightful
airs, that called forth the inhabitants of every island, and held
them silent, as if spell-bound, on the edge of their quays and
terraces, till we were out of hearing.

Leaving Murano far behind, Venice and its world of turrets
began to sink on the horizon, and the low desert isles beyond
Mazorbo to lie stretched out before us.  Now we beheld vast
wastes of
[171]
purple flowers, and could distinguish
the low hum of the insects which hover above them; such was the
silence of the place.  Coasting these solitary fields, we
wound amongst several serpentine canals, bordered by gardens of
figs and pomegranates, with neat Indian-looking inclosures of
cane and reed: an aromatic plant clothes the margin of the
waters, which the people justly dignify with the title of marine
incense.  It proved very serviceable in subduing a musky
odour, which attacked us the moment we landed, and which proceeds
from serpents that lurk in the hedges.  These animals, say
the gondoliers, defend immense treasures which lie buried under
the ruins.  Woe to those who attempt invading them, or
prying too cautiously about!

Not choosing to be devoured, we left many a mount of fragments
unnoticed, and made the best of our way to a little green, free
from weeds or adders, bounded on one side by a miserable shed,
decorated with the name of the Podesta’s residence, and on
the other by a circular church.  Some remains of tolerable
antique sculpture are enchased in the walls; and the dome,
supported by pillars of a smooth Grecian marble, though uncouth
and ill-proportioned, impresses a sort of veneration, and
transports the fancy to the twilight glimmering period when it
was raised.

Having surveyed what little was visible, and given as much
career to our imaginations as the scene inspired, we walked over
a soil composed of crumbling bricks and cement to the cathedral;
whose arches, turned on the ancient Roman principle, convinced us
that it dates as high as the sixth or seventh century.

Nothing can be well more fantastic than the ornaments of this
structure, formed from the ruins of the Pagan temples of Altina,
and incrusted with a gilt mosaic, like that which covers our
Edward the Confessor’s tomb.  The pavement, composed
of various precious marbles, is richer and more beautiful than
one could have expected, in a place where every other object
savours of the grossest barbarism.  At the farther end,
beyond the altar, appears a semicircular niche, with seats like
the gradines of a diminutive amphitheatre; above rise the quaint
forms of the apostles, in red, blue, green, and black mosaic, and
in the midst of the goodly group a sort of marble chair, cool and
penitential enough, where St. Lorenzo Giustiniani sat to hold a
provincial council, the Lord knows how long ago!  The fount
for holy water stands by the principal entrance, fronting this
curious recess, and seems to have belonged to some place of
Gentile worship.  The figures of horned imps cling round its
sides, more devilish, more Egyptian, than any I ever
beheld.  The dragons on old china are not more whimsical: I
longed to have it filled with bats’ blood, and to have sent
it by way of present to the sabbath; I can assure you it would
have done honour to their witcheries.  The sculpture is not
the most delicate, but I cannot say a great deal about it, as but
little light reaches the spot where it is fixed.  Indeed,
the whole church is far from luminous, its windows being narrow
and near the roof, with shutters composed of blocks of marble,
which nothing but the last whirlwind, one should think, could
move from their hinges.

By the time we had examined every nook and corner of this
singular edifice, and caught perhaps some small portion of
sanctity by sitting in San Lorenzo’s chair, dinner was
prepared in a neighbouring convent, and the nuns, allured by the
sound of our flutes and oboes, peeped out of their cells and
showed themselves by dozens at the grate.  Some few
agreeable faces and interesting eyes enlivened the dark
sisterhood; all seemed to catch a gleam of pleasure from the
music; two or three of them, probably the last immured, let fall
a tear, and suffered the recollection of the world and its
profane joys to interrupt for a moment their sacred
tranquillity.

We stayed till the sun was low, and the breezes blew cool from
the ocean, on purpose that they might listen as long as possible
to a harmony which seemed to issue, as the old abbess expressed
herself, from the gates of paradise ajar.  A thousand
benedictions consecrated our departure; twilight came on just as
we entered the bark and rowed out upon the waves, agitated by a
fresh gale, but fearing nothing under the protection of St.
Margherita, whose good wishes our music had secured.

In two hours we were safely landed at the Fondamenti nuovi,
and went immediately to the Mendicanti, where they were
performing the oratorio of Sisera.  The composer, a young
man, had displayed great fire and originality in this
performance; and a knowledge of character seldom found in the
most celebrated masters.  The supplication of the thirsty
chieftain, and Jael’s insinuating arts and pious treachery,
are admirably expressed; but the agitation and bodily slumbers
which precede his death, are imagined in the highest strain of
genius.  The terror and agony of his dreams made me start,
more than once, from my seat; and all the horrors of his
assassination seemed full before me, so fatal was the sound of
the instrument, so just the conduct of the harmony.

Too much applause cannot be given to the Marchetti, who sang
the part of Sisera, and seconded the composer’s ideas by
the most feeling and spirited execution.  There are few
things I shall regret more at Venice, than this
conservatorio.  Whenever I am musically given, I fly to it,
and hear the most striking finales in Bertoni’s and
Anfosse’s operas, as long and often as I please.

The sight of the orchestra still makes me smile.  You
know, I suppose, it is entirely of the female gender, and that
nothing is more common than to see a delicate white hand
journeying across an enormous double bass, or a pair of roseate
cheeks puffing, with all their efforts, at a French horn.
Some that are grown old and Amazonian, who have abandoned their
fiddles and their lovers, take vigorously to the kettledrum; and
one poor limping lady, who had been crossed in love, now makes an
admirable figure on the bassoon.

Good-night!  I am quite exhausted with composing a chorus
for these same Amazonians.  The poetry I send you, which
seems to be some of the most picturesque and nervous an Italian
ever produced.  The music takes up too much room to travel
at present.  One day or other, perhaps, we may hear it in
some dark grove, when the moon is eclipsed and nature in
alarm.

This is not the last letter you would receive from Venice, was
I not hurrying to Lucca, where Pacchierotti sings next week, in
the opera of Quinto Fabio, of all operas the most worthy to
excuse such a musical fanaticism.  Adieu.

LETTER X.

September
4
th
.—I was sorry to leave
Venice, and regretted my peaceful excursions upon the Adriatic,
when the Euganean hills were lost in a golden haze, and the sun
cast his departing gleam across the waters.  No bright rays
illuminated my departure, but the coolness and perfume of the air
made some amends for their absence.

About an hour’s rowing from the isle of Saint Giorgio in
Alga, brought us to the shores of Fusina, right opposite the
opening where the Brenta mixes with the sea.  This river
flows calmly between banks of verdure, crowned by poplars, with
vines twining round every stalk, and depending from tree to tree
in beautiful festoons.  Beds of mint and flowers clothe the
brink of the stream, except where a tall growth of reeds and
osiers lift themselves to the breezes.  I heard their
whispers as we glided along; and had I been alone might have told
you what they said to me; but such aërial oracles must be
approached in solitude.  The morning continued to lower as
we advanced; scarce a wind ventured to breathe; all was still and
placid as the surface of the Brenta.  No sound struck my
ears except the bargemen hallooing to open the sluices, and
deepen the water.

As yet I had not perceived an habitation; no other objects
than green inclosures and fields of Turkish corn, shaded with
vines and poplars, met my eyes wherever I turned them.

Our navigation, the tranquil streams and cultivated banks, in
short the whole landscape, had a sort of Chinese cast, which led
me into Quang-Si and Quang-Tong.  The variety of canes,
reeds, and blooming rushes, shooting from the slopes, confirmed
my fancies, and when I beheld the yellow nenupha expanding its
broad leaves to the current, I thought of the Tao-Sé, and
venerated one of the chief ingredients in their beverage of
immortality.  Landing where this magic vegetation appeared
most luxuriant, I cropped the flowers; but searched in vain for
the kernels, which, according to the doctrine of the Bonzes,
produce such wonderful effects.  Though I was deceived in
this pursuit, I gained, however, in another.  The bank upon
which I had sprung presented a continual walk of level turf,
surrounded by vines, concealing the trees which supported them,
and forming the most delightful bowers.  Under these
garlands I passed, and gathered the ripe clusters which dangled
around, convinced that Noah had discovered a far superior
beverage to that of the Tao-Sé.  Whilst I was thus
agreeably employed, it began to rain, and the earth to exhale a
fresh, reviving odour, highly grateful to one who had been so
long confined to walls and waters.  After breathing nothing
but the essence of the canals and the flavours of the Rialto,
after the jingling of bells and brawls of the gondoliers, imagine
how agreeable it was to scent the perfume of clover, to tread a
springing herbage, and listen in silence to the showers pattering
amongst the leaves.  I staid so long amidst the vines, that
it grew late before we rowed by the Mira, a village of palaces,
whose courts and gardens, as magnificent as statues, terraces,
and vases can make them, compose a grand, though far from a rural
prospect.

Not being greatly delighted with such scenery, we stayed no
longer than our dinner required, and reached the Dolo an hour
before sunset.  Passing the great sluices, whose gates
opened with a thundering noise, we continued our course along the
peaceful Brenta, winding its broad full stream through
impenetrable copses, surmounted by tall waving poplars.  Day
was about to close when we reached Fiesso; and it being a misty
evening, I could scarcely distinguish the pompous façade
of the Pisani palace.  That where we supped looks upon a
broad mass of foliage, which I contemplated with pleasure as it
sank in the dusk.

We walked a long while under a pavilion stretched before the
entrance, breathing the freshness of the wood after the shower,
and hearing the drops trickle down the awning above our
heads.  The Galuzzi sang some of her father
Ferandini’s compositions, with a fire, an energy, an
expression, that one moment raised me to a pitch of heroism, and
the next dissolved me in tears.  Her cheek was flushed with
inspiration, her eyes glistened; the whole tone of her
countenance was like that of a person rapt and inspired.  I
forgot both time and place whilst she was breathing forth such
celestial harmony.  The night stole imperceptibly away, and
morning dawned before I awoke from my trance.  I don’t
recollect ever to have passed an evening, which every
circumstance conspired so much to improve.  In general, my
musical pleasures suffer terrible abatements from the phlegm and
stupidity of my neighbourhood, but here every one seemed to catch
the flame, and to listen with reciprocal delight.  The
C— threw quick around her the glancing fires of genius:
and, what with the song of the Galuzzi, and those intellectual
meteors, I scarcely knew to what element I was transported; and
doubted for several moments whether I had not fallen into a
celestial dream.  I loathed the light of the morning star,
which summoned me to depart; and, if I may express myself so
poetically,

“Cast many a
longing, ling’ring look behind.”

LETTER XI.

September
5
th
.—The glow and splendour of
the rising sun, for once in my life, drew little of my
attention.  I was too deeply plunged in my reveries, to
notice the landscape which lay before me; and the walls of Padua
presented themselves some time ere I was aware.  At any
other moment, how sensibly should I have been affected with their
appearance! how many ideas of Antenor and his Trojans, would have
thronged into my memory! but now I regarded the scene with
indifference, and passed many a palace, and many a woody garden,
with my eyes riveted to the ground.  The first object that
appeared, upon lifting them up, was a confused pile of spires and
cupolas, dedicated to blessed St. Anthony, who betook himself to
the conversion of fish, after the heretics would lend no ear to
his discourses.

You are too well apprised of the veneration I have always
entertained for this ingenious preacher, to doubt that I
immediately repaired to his shrine and offered up my little
orisons before it.  Mine was a disturbed spirit, and
required all the balm of St. Anthony’s kindness to appease
it.  Perhaps you will say I had better gone to bed, and
applied myself to my sleepy friend, the pagan divinity.
’Tis probable that you are in the right; but I could not
retire to rest without venting some portion of effervescence in
sighs and supplications.  The nave was filled with decrepit
women and feeble children, kneeling by baskets of vegetables and
other provisions; which, by good Anthony’s interposition,
they hoped to sell advantageously in the course of the day.
Beyond these, nearer the choir, and in a gloomier part of the
edifice, knelt a row of rueful penitents, smiting their breasts,
and lifting their eyes to heaven.  Further on, in front of
the dark recess, where the sacred relics are deposited, a few
desperate, melancholy sinners lay prostrate.

To these I joined myself, and fell down on the steps before
the shrine.  The sunbeams had not yet penetrated into this
religious quarter; and the only light it received proceeded from
the golden lamps, which hang in clusters round the
sanctuary.  A lofty altar, decked with superstitious
prodigality, conceals the holy pile from profane glances.
Those who are profoundly touched with its sanctity may approach,
and walking round, look through the crevices of the tomb, and rub
their noses against the identical bones of St. Anthony, which, it
is observed, exude a balsamic odour.  But supposing a
traveller ever so heretical, I would advise him by no means to
neglect this pilgrimage; since every part of the recess he visits
is decorated with the most exquisite sculptures.  Sansovino
and the best artists have vied with each other in carving the
alto relievos of the arcade, which, for design and execution,
would do honour to the sculptors of antiquity.

Having observed these objects with much less exactness than
they merited, and acted perhaps too capital a part amongst the
devotees, I hastened to the inn, luckily hard by, and one of the
best I am acquainted with.  Here I soon fell asleep in
defiance of sunshine.  ’Tis true my slumbers were not
a little agitated.  St. Anthony had been deaf to my prayer,
and I still found myself a frail, infatuated mortal.

At five I got up; we dined, and afterwards, scarcely knowing,
nor much caring, what became of us, we strolled to the great hall
of the town; an enormous edifice, as large as that of
Westminster, but free from stalls, or shops, or nests of
litigation.  The roof, one spacious vault of brown timber,
casts a solemn gloom, which was still increased by the lateness
of the hour, and not diminished by the wan light, admitted
through the windows of pale blue glass.  The size and shape
of this colossal chamber, the coving of the roof, with beams like
perches for the feathered race, stretching across it, and, above
all, the watery gleams that glanced through the casements,
possessed my fancy with ideas of Noah’s ark, and almost
persuaded me I beheld that extraordinary vessel.  The
representation one sees of it in Scheutzer’s “Physica
Sacra” seems to be formed upon this very model, and for
several moments I indulged the chimera of imagining myself
confined within its precincts.  How willingly, could I but
choose my companions, would I encounter a deluge, to float whole
years instead of months upon the waves!

We remained walking to and fro in the ark, till the twilight
faded into total darkness.  It was then full time to retire,
as the guardian of the place was by no means formed to divine our
diluvian ideas.

LETTER XII.

September
6
th
.—At Padua, I was too near
the last and one of the most celebrated abodes of Petrarch, to
make the omission of a visit excusable; had I not been in a
disposition to render such a pilgrimage peculiarly
pleasing.  I set forwards from Padua after dinner, so as to
arrive some time before sunset.  Nothing could be finer than
the day; and I had every reason to promise myself a serene and
delicious hour, before the sun might go down.  I put the
poems of Petrarch into my pocket; and, as my road lay chiefly
through lanes, planted on either side with mulberries and
poplars, from which vines hung dangling in careless festoons, I
found many a bowering shade, where I sat, at intervals, to
indulge my pensive humour over some ejaculatory sonnet; as the
pilgrim, on his journey to Loretto, reposes here and there, to
offer his prayers and meditations to the Virgin.  In little
more than an hour and half, I found myself in the midst of the
Euganean hills, and, after winding almost another hour amongst
them, I got, before I was well aware, into the village of
Arqua.  Nothing can be more sequestered or obscure than its
situation.  It had rather a deserted appearance; several of
its houses being destitute of inhabitants, and crumbling into
ruins.  Two or three of them, however, exhibited ancient
towers, richly mantled with ivy, and surrounded with cypress,
that retained the air of having once belonged to persons of
consideration.  Their present abandoned state nourished the
melancholy idea with which I entered the village.  Could one
approach the last retreat of genius, and not look for some glow
of its departed splendour?

“Dear to the pensive eye of fond regret,

Is light still beaming from a sun that’s set.”

The residence of Petrarch at Arqua is said to have drawn
thither from Padua the society of its more enlightened
citizens.  This city, whilst Petrarch lived in its
neighbourhood, was engaged in rebellion against the Venetians;
and Francis de Carrara, the head of it, went often to Arqua, to
consult Petrarch; when he found himself obliged to sue to Venice
for peace.  The poet was indeed deputed, upon this occasion,
his ambassador to the state; as being a person whose character
and credit were most likely to appease its wrath.  His
success in this embassy might, perhaps, have been some recompense
for an employment he accepted with much regret, as it forced him
from his beloved retirement.  In a letter to one of his
friends, written about this period of his life, he says: “I
pass the greatest part of the year in the country, which I have
always preferred to cities: I read; I write; I think: thus, my
life and my pleasures are like those of youth.  I take pains
to hide myself; but I cannot escape visits: it is an honour which
displeases and wearies me.  In my little house on the
Euganean hills, I hope to pass my few remaining days in
tranquillity, and to have always before my eyes my dead, or my
absent, friends.”  I was musing on these circumstances
as I walked along the village, till a venerable old woman, seated
at her door with her distaff in her hand, observing me, soon
guessed the cause of my excursion; and offered to guide me to
Petrarch’s house.  The remainder of my way was short,
and well amused by my guide’s enthusiastic expressions of
veneration for the poet’s memory; which, she assured me,
she felt but in common with the other inhabitants of the
village.  When we came to the door of the house, we met the
peasant, its present possessor.  The old woman, recommending
the stranger and his curiosity to her neighbour’s good
offices, departed.  I entered immediately, and ran over
every room, which the peasant assured me, in confirmation of what
I before learnt from better authority, were preserved, as nearly
as they could be, in the state Petrarch had left them.  The
house and premises, having unfortunately been transmitted from
one enthusiast of his name to another, no tenants have been
admitted, but under the strictest prohibition of making any
change in the form of the apartments, or in the memorial relics
belonging to the place: and, to say the truth, everything I saw
in it, save a few articles of the peasant’s furniture in
the kitchen, has an authentic appearance.  Three of the
rooms below stairs are particularly shown, and they have nothing
in them but what once belonged to the poet.  In one, which I
think they call his parlour, is a very antique cupboard; where,
it is supposed, he deposited some precious part of his literary
treasure.  The ceiling is painted in a grotesque
manner.  A niche in the wall contains the skeleton of his
favourite cat, with a Latin epigram beneath, of Petrarch’s
composition.  It is good enough to deserve being copied; but
the lateness of the hour did not allow me time.  A little
room, beyond this, is said to have been his study: the walls of
it, from top to bottom, are scribbled over with sonnets, and
poetical eulogies on Petrarch, ancient and modern: many of which
are subscribed by persons, of distinguished rank and talents,
Italians as well as strangers.  Here, too, is the
bard’s old chair, and on it is displayed a great deal of
heavy, ornamental carpentry; which required no stretch of faith
to be believed the manufacture of the fourteenth century.
You may be sure, I placed myself in it, with much veneration, and
the most resigned assent to Mrs. Dobson’s relation: that
Petrarch, sitting in this same chair, was found dead in his
library, with one arm leaning on a book.  Who could sit in
Petrarch’s chair, void of some effect?  I rose not
from it without a train of pensive sentiments and soft
impressions; which I ever love to indulge.  I was now led
into a larger room, behind that I first saw; where, it is likely
enough, the poet, according to the peasant’s information,
received the visits of his friends.  Its walls were adorned
with landscapes and pastoral scenes, in such painting as Petrarch
himself might, and is supposed to have executed.  Void of
taste and elegance, either in the design or colouring, they bear
some characteristic marks of the age to which they are, with no
improbability, assigned; and, separate from the merit of
exhibiting repeatedly the portraits of Petrarch and Laura, are a
valuable sketch of the rude infancy of the art, where it rose
with such hasty vigour to perfection.  Having seen all that
was left unchanged in this consecrated mansion, I passed through
a room, said to have been the bard’s bed-room, and stepped
into the garden, situated on a green slope, descending directly
from the house.  It is now rather an orchard than a garden;
a spot of small extent, and without much else to recommend it,
but that it once was the property of Petrarch.  It is not
pretended to have retained the form in which he left it.  An
agreeably wild and melancholy kind of view, which it commands
over the Euganean hills, and which I beheld under the calm glow
of approaching sunset, must often, at the same moment, have
soothed the poet’s anxious feelings, and hushed his active
imagination, as it did my own, into a delicious repose.
Having lingered here till the sun was sunk beneath the horizon, I
was led a little way farther in the village, to see
Petrarch’s fountain.  Hippocrene itself could not have
been more esteemed by the poet, than this, his gift, by all the
inhabitants of Arqua.  The spring is copious, clear, and of
excellent water; I need not say with what relish I drank of
it.  The last religious act in my little pilgrimage was a
visit to the church-yard; where I strewed a few flowers, the
fairest of the season, on the poet’s tomb; and departed for
Padua by the light of the moon.

LETTER XIII.

September
7
th
.—Immediately after
breakfast, we went to St. Justina’s, a noble temple,
designed by Palladio, and worthy of his reputation.  The
dimensions are vast, and the equal distribution of light and
ornament truly admirable.  Upon my first entrance, the long
perspective of domes above, and chequered marble below, struck me
with surprise and pleasure.  I roved about the spacious
aisles for several minutes, then sat down under the grand cupola,
and admired the beautiful symmetry of the building.

Both extremities of the cross aisles are terminated by altar
and tombs of very remote antiquity, adorned with uncouth
sculptures of the Evangelists, supported by wreathed columns of
alabaster, round which, to my no small astonishment, four or five
gawky fellows were waddling on their knees, persuaded, it seems,
that this strange devotion would cure the rheumatism, or any
other aches with which they were afflicted.  You can have no
conception of the ridiculous attitudes into which they threw
themselves; nor the difficulty with which they squeezed along,
between the middle column of the tomb and those which surrounded
it.  No criminal in the pillory ever exhibited a more rueful
appearance, no swine ever scrubbed itself more fervently than
these infatuated lubbers.

I left them hard at work, taking more exercise than had been
their lot for many a day; and, mounting into the organ gallery,
listened to Turini’s
[182]
music with
infinite satisfaction.  The loud harmonious tones of the
instrument filled the whole edifice; and, being repeated by the
echoes of its lofty domes and arches, produced a wonderful
effect.  Turini, aware of this circumstance, adapts his
compositions with great intelligence to the place, and makes his
slave, the organ, send forth the most affecting, long-protracted
sounds, which languish in the air, and are some time
a-dying.  Nothing can be more original than his style.
Deprived of sight by an unhappy accident, in the flower of his
days, he gave up his entire soul to music, and scarcely exists
but through its medium.

When we came out of St. Justina’s, the azure of the sky
and the softness of the air inclined us to think of some
excursion.  Where could I wish to go, but to the place in
which I had been so delighted?  Besides, it was proper to
make the C. another visit, and proper to see the Pisani palace,
which happily I had before neglected.  All these proprieties
considered, M. de R. accompanied me to Fiesso.

The sun was just sunk when we arrived; the whole ether in a
glow, and the fragrance of the arched citron alleys
delightful.  Beneath them I walked in the cool, till the
Galuzzi began once more her enchanting melody.  She sung
till the moon tempted the fascinating G—a and myself to
stray on the banks of the Brenta.  A profound calm reigned
upon the woods and the waters, and moonlight added serenity to a
scene naturally peaceful.  We listened to the faint murmurs
of the leaves, and the distant rural noises, observing the gleams
that quivered on the river, and discovered a mutual delight in
contemplating the same objects.

We supped late: before the Galuzzi had repeated the airs which
had most affected me, morning began to dawn.

September
8
th
.—It was evening, and I was
still asleep; not in a tranquil slumber, but at the mercy of
fantastic visions.  The want of sound repose had thrown me
into a feverish impatient mood, that was alone to be subdued by
harmony.  Scarcely had I snatched some slight refreshment,
before I flew to the great organ at St. Justina’s, but
tried, this time, to compose myself in vain.  M. de R.,
finding my endeavours unsuccessful, proposed, by way of diverting
my attention, that we should set out immediately for one of the
Euganean hills about five or seven miles from Padua, at the foot
of which some antique baths had very lately been
discovered.  I consented, without hesitation, little
concerned whither I went, or what happened to me, provided the
scene was often shifted.  The lanes and enclosures we passed
on our road to the hills, appeared in all the gaiety that
verdure, flowers, and sunshine could give them.  But my
pleasures were overcast, and I beheld every object, however
cheerful, through a dusky medium.  Deeply engaged in
conversation, distance made no impression; and we beheld the
meadows, over which the ruins are scattered, lie before us, when
we still imagined ourselves several miles away.  Had I but
enjoyed my former serenity, how agreeably would such a landscape
have affected my imagination!  How lightly should I not have
run over the herbage, and viewed the irregular shrubby hills,
diversified with clumps of cypress, verdant spots, and pastoral
cottages, such as Zuccarelli loved to paint!  No scene could
be more smiling than this which here presented itself, or answer,
in a fuller degree, the ideas I had formed of Italy.

Leaving our carriage at the entrance of the mead, we traversed
its flowery surface, and shortly perceived among the grass an
oblong basin, incrusted with pure white marble.  Most of the
slabs are large and perfect, apparently brought from Greece, and
still retaining their polished smoothness.  The pipes to
convey the waters are still discernible; in short, the whole
ground-plan may be easily traced.  Nothing more remains: the
pillars and arcades are fallen, and one or two pedestals alone
vouch for their former existence.  Near the principal bath,
we remarked the platforms of several circular apartments, paved
with mosaic, in a neat simple taste, far from inelegant.
Weeds have not yet sprung up amongst the crevices; and the
universal freshness of the ruin shows that it has not been long
exposed.

Theodoric is the prince to whom these structures are
attributed; and Cassiodorus, the prime chronicler of the country,
is quoted to maintain the supposition.  My spirit was too
much engaged to make any learned parade, or to dispute upon a
subject, which I abandon, with all its glories, to calmer and
less impatient minds.

Having taken a cursory view of the ruins in the mead, we
ascended the hill which borders upon it, and surveyed a prospect
of the same nature, though in a more lovely and expanded style,
than that which I beheld from Mosolente.  Padua crowns the
landscape, with its towers and cupolas rising from a continued
grove; and, from the drawings I have seen, I should conjecture
that Damascus presents somewhat of a similar appearance.

Taking our eyes off this extensive prospect, we turned them to
the fragments beneath our feet.  The walls appear plainly
composed of the
opus reticulatum
so universal in the
environs of Naples.  A sort of terrace, with the bases of
columns circling the mount, leads me to imagine here were
formerly arcades and porticos, for enjoying the view; for on the
summit I could trace no vestiges of any considerable structure,
and am therefore inclined to conclude, that nothing more than a
colonnade surrounded the hill, leading perhaps to some slight
fane, or pavilion, for the recreation of the bathers below.

A profusion of aromatic flowers covered the slopes, and
exhaled additional perfumes, as the sun declined, and the still
hour approached, which was wont to spread over my mind a divine
composure, and to restore the tranquillity I might have lost in
the day.  But now it diffused in vain its reviving coolness,
and I remained, if possible, more sad and restless than
before.

To produce such a revolution, divine how I must have been
fascinated! and be not surprised at my repeating all the way that
pathetic sonnet of Petrarch:

“O giorno, o ora, o ultimo momento,

O stelle congiurate a ’mpoverirme!

O fido sguardo, or che volei tu dirme,

Partend’ io, per non esser mai contento?”

September
9
th
.—You may imagine how I felt
when the hour of leaving Padua drew near.  It happened to be
a high festival, and mass celebrated at the grand church of St.
Anthony, with more than ordinary splendour.  The music
drawing us thither, we found every chapel twinkling with lights,
and the choir filled with a vapour of incense.  Through its
medium several cloth of gold figures discovered themselves,
ministering before the altar, and acting their parts with a
sacred pomposity, wonderfully imposing.  I attended very
little to their functions, but the plaintive tones of the voices
and instruments, so consonant with my own feelings, melted me
into tears, and gave me, no doubt, the exterior of exalted
piety.  Guadazni sang amongst the other musicians, but
seemed to be sinking apace into devotion and obscurity.  The
ceremony ended, I took leave of M. de R. with sincere regret, and
was driven away to Vicenza.  Of my journey I scarce know any
more than that the evening was cold and rainy, that I shivered
and was miserable.

September
10
th
.—The morning being
overcast, I went, full of the spirit of Æschylus, to the
Olympic Theatre, and vented my evil temper in reciting some of
the most tremendous verses of his furies.  The august front
of the scene, and its three grand streets of fanes and palaces,
inspired me with the loftiest sentiments of the Grecian drama;
but the dubious light admitted through windows, scarce visible
between the rows of statues which crown the entablature, sunk me
into fits of gloom and sadness.  I mused a long while in the
darkest and most retired recess of the edifice, fancying I had
penetrated into a real and perfect monument of antiquity, which
till this moment had remained undiscovered.  It is
impossible to conceive a structure more truly classical, or to
point out a single ornament which has not the best antique
authority.  I am not in the least surprised that the
citizens of Vicenza enthusiastically gave in to Palladio’s
plan, and sacrificed large sums to erect so beautiful a
model.  When finished, they procured, at a vast expense, the
representation of a Grecian tragedy, with its chorus and majestic
decorations.  You can enter into the rapture of an artist,
who sees his fondest vision realized; and can easily conceive how
it was, that Palladio esteemed this compliment the most
flattering reward.  After I had given scope to the fancies
which the scene suggested, we set out for Verona.

The situation is striking and picturesque.  A long line
of battlement walls, flanked by venerable towers, mounts the hill
in a grand irregular sweep, and incloses many a woody garden and
grove of slender cypress.  Beyond rises an awful assembly of
mountains; opposite to which a fertile plain presents itself,
decked with all the variety of meads and thickets, olive-grounds
and vineyards.

Amongst these our road kept winding till we entered the city
gate, and passed (the post knows how many streets and alleys in
the way!) to the inn, a lofty, handsome-looking building; but so
full that we were obliged to take up with an apartment on its
very summit, open to all the winds, like the magic chamber
Apuleius mentions, and commanding the roofs of half Verona.
Here and there a pine shot up amongst them, and the shady hills,
terminating the perspective with their walls and turrets, formed
a romantic scene.

Placing our table in a balcony, to enjoy the prospect with
greater freedom, we feasted upon fish from the Lago di Garda, and
the delicious fruits of the country,—grapes worthy of
Canaan, and peaches such as Eden itself might have gloried in
producing.  Thus did I remain, solacing myself, breathing
the cool air, and remarking the evening tints of the
mountains.  Neither the paintings of Count this, nor the
antiquities of the Marquis t’other, could tempt me from my
aërial situation; I refused hunting out the famous Paolos
scattered over the town, and sat like the owl in the
Georgics,

“Solis et occasom
servans de culmine summo.”

Twilight drawing on, I left my haunt, and stealing downstairs,
inquired for a guide to conduct me to the amphitheatre, perhaps
the most entire monument of Roman days.  The people of the
house, instead of bringing me a quiet peasant, officiously
delivered me up to a professed antiquary, one of those diligent
plausible young men, to whom, God help me! I have so capital an
aversion.  This sweet spark displayed all his little
erudition, and flourished away upon cloacas and vomitoriums with
eternal fluency.  He was very profound in the doctrine of
conduits, and knew to admiration how the filthiness of all the
amphitheatre was disposed of; but perceiving my inattention, and
having just grace enough to remark that I chose one side of the
street when he preferred the other, and sometimes trotted through
despair in the kennel, he made me a pretty bow, I threw him
half-a-crown, and seeing the ruins before me, traversed a gloomy
arcade and emerged alone into the arena.  A smooth turf
covers its surface, from which a spacious row of gradines rises
to a majestic elevation.  Four arches, with their simple
Doric ornament, alone remain of the grand circle which once
lifted itself above the highest seats of the amphitheatre; and,
had it not been for Gothic violence, this part of the structure
would have equally resisted the ravages of time.  Nothing
can be more exact than the preservation of the gradines; not a
block has sunk from its place, and whatever trifling injuries
they may have received have been carefully repaired.  The
two chief entrances are rebuilt with solidity and closed by
portals, no passage being permitted through the theatre except at
public shows and representations, sometimes still given in the
arena.

When I paced slowly across it, silence reigned undisturbed
amongst the awful ruins, and nothing moved, save the weeds and
grasses which skirt the walls and tremble with the faintest
breeze.

I liked the idea of being thus shut in on every side by
endless gradines, abandoned to a stillness and solitude I was so
peculiarly disposed to taste.  Throwing myself upon the
grass in the middle of the arena, I enjoyed the freedom of my
situation; and pursued the last tracks of light, as they faded
behind the solitary arches, which rose above the rest.  Red
and fatal were the tints of the western sky; the wind blew chill
and hollow, and something more than common seemed to issue from
the withering herbage on the walls.  I started up, fled
through a dark arcade, where water falls drop by drop, and
arrived, panting, in the great square before the ruins.
Directing my steps across it, I reached an ancient castle, once
inhabited by the Scaligeri, sovereigns of Verona.  Hard by
appeared the ruins of a triumphal arch, which most antiquarians
ascribe to Vitruvius, enriched with delicate scrolls and flowery
ornaments.  I could have passed half-an-hour very agreeably
in copying these elegant sculptures; but night covering them with
her shades, I returned home to the Corso; where the outlines of
several palaces, designed by Michel San Michele, attracted my
attention.  But it was too dusky to examine their
details.

September
11
th
.—Traversing once more the
grand piazza, and casting a last glance upon the amphitheatre, we
passed under a lofty arch which terminates the perspective, and
left Verona by a wide, irregular, picturesque street, commanding,
whenever you look back, a striking scene of towers, cypress, and
mountains.

The country, between this beautiful town and Mantua, presents
one continued grove of dwarfish mulberries, among which start up
innumerable barren hills.  Now and then a knot of poplars
diversify their craggy summits, and sometimes a miserable
shed.  Mantua itself rises out of a morass formed by the
Mincio, whose course, in most places, is so choked up with reeds
as to be scarcely discernible.  It requires a creative
imagination to discover any charms in such a prospect, and a
strong prepossession not to be disgusted with the scene where
Virgil was born.  For my own part, I approached this
neighbourhood with proper deference, and began to feel the God,
but finding no tufted tree on which I could suspend my lyre, or
verdant bank which invited to repose, I abandoned poetry and
entered the city in despair.

The beating of drums, and sight of German whiskers, finished
what croaking frogs and stagnant ditches had begun.  Every
classic idea being scared by such sounds and such objects, I
dined in dudgeon, and refused stirring out till late in the
evening.

A few paces from the town stand the remains of the palace
where the Gonzagas formerly resided.  This I could not
resist looking at, and was amply rewarded.  Several of the
apartments, adorned by the bold pencil of Julio Romano, merit the
most exact attention; and the grotesques, with which the stucco
ceilings are covered, equal the celebrated loggios of the
Vatican.  I don’t recollect ever having seen these
elegant designs engraven, and believe it would be perfectly worth
the pains of some capital artist to copy them.  Being in
fresco upon damp neglected walls, each year diminishes their
number, and every winter moulders some beautiful figure away.

The subjects, mostly from antique fables, are treated with all
the purity and gracefulness of Raphael.  Amongst others the
story of Polypheme is very conspicuous.  Acis appears,
reclined with his beloved Galatea, on the shore of the ocean,
whilst their gigantic enemy, seated above on the brow of
Ætna, seems by the paleness and horrors of his countenance
to meditate some terrible revenge.

When it was too late to examine the paintings any longer, I
walked into a sort of court, or rather garden, which had been
decorated with fountains and antique statues.  Their
fragments still remain amongst weeds and beds of flowers, for
every corner of the place is smothered with vegetation.
Here nettles grow thick and rampant: there, tuberoses and
jessamine cling around mounds of ruins, which during the elegant
reign of the Gonzagas led to grottos and subterranean apartments,
concealed from vulgar eyes, and sacred to the most refined
enjoyments.  I gathered a tuberose that sprang from a shell
of white marble, once trickling with water, now half filled with
mould, and carrying it home, shut myself up for the rest of the
night, inhaled its perfume, and fell a-dreaming.

September
12
th
.—A shower having fallen,
the air was refreshed, and the drops still glittered upon the
vines, through which our road conducted us.  Three or four
miles from Mantua the scene changed to extensive grounds of rice,
and meads of the tenderest verdure watered by springs, whose
frequent meanders gave to the whole prospect the appearance of a
vast green carpet shot with silver.  Further on we crossed
the Po, and passing Guastalla, entered a woody country full of
inclosures and villages; herds feeding in the meadows, and
poultry parading before every wicket.

The peasants were busied in winnowing their corn; or, mounted
upon the elms and poplars, gathering the rich clusters from the
vines that hang streaming in braids from one branch to
another.  I was surprised to find myself already in the
midst of the vintage, and to see every road crowded with carts
and baskets bringing it along; you cannot imagine a pleasanter
scene.

Round Reggio it grew still more lively, and on the other side
of that agreeable little city, I remarked many a cottage that
Tityrus might have inhabited, with its garden and willow hedge in
flower, swarming with bees.  Our road, the smoothest
conceivable, led us, perhaps too rapidly, by so cheerful a
landscape.  I caught glimpses of fields and copses as we
fled along, that could have afforded me amusement for hours, and
orchards on gentle acclivities, beneath which I could have walked
till evening.  The trees literally bent under their loads of
fruit, and innumerable ruddy apples lay scattered upon the
ground—

“Strata jacent
passim sus quæque sub arbore poma.”

Beyond these rich masses of foliage, to which the sun lent
additional splendour, at the utmost extremity of the pastures,
rose the irregular ridge of the Apennines, whose deep blue
presented a striking contrast to the glowing colours of the
foreground.  I fixed my eyes on the chain of distant
mountains, and indulged, as usual, my conjectures of what was
going forward on their summits; of those who tended goats on the
edge of the precipice; traversed, at this moment, the dark
thickets of pines, and passed their lives in yonder sheds,
contented and unknown.  Such were the dreams that filled my
fancy, and kept it incessantly employed till it was dusk, and the
moon began to show herself; the same moon which, but a few days
ago, had seen me so happy at Fiesso.  Her soft light reposed
upon the meads, that had been newly mown, and the shadows of tall
poplars were cast aslant them.  I left my carriage, and
running into the dim haze, abandoned myself to the recollection
it inspired.  During an hour, I kept continually flying
forwards; bounding from enclosure to enclosure like a hunted
antelope, and forgetting where I was or whither I was
going.  One sole idea filled my mind, and led me on with
such heedless rapidity, that I stumbled over stones and bushes,
and entangled myself on every wreath of vines which opposed my
progress.  At length, having wandered where chance or the
wildness of my fancy led, till the lateness of the evening
alarmed me, I regained the chaise as fast as I could, and arrived
between ten and eleven at the place of my destination.

September
13
th
.—Having but a moment or two
at liberty, I hurried early in the morning to the palace, and
entered an elegant Ionic court, with arcades of the whitest
stone, through which I caught peeps of a clear blue sky and
groves of cypresses.  Some few good paintings still adorn
the apartments, but the best part of the collection has been
disposed of, for a hundred thousand sequins, amongst which was
that inestimable picture, the Notte of Corregio.  An
excellent copy remained and convinced me the original was not
undeservedly celebrated.  None but the pencil of Corregio
ever designed such graceful angels, nor imagined such a pearly
dawn to cast around them.  Ten thousand times, I dare say,
has the subject of the Nativity been treated, and as many
painters have failed in rendering it so pleasing.  The break
of day, the first smiles of the celestial infant, and the truth,
the simplicity of every countenance, cannot be too warmly
admired.  In the other rooms, no picture gave me more
pleasure than Jacob’s Vision by Domenico Feti.  I
gazed several minutes at the grand confusion of clouds and
seraphim descending around the patriarch, and wished for a
similar dream.

Having spent the little time I had remaining in contemplating
this object, I hastened from the palace and left Modena.

We traversed a champagne country in our way to Bologna, whose
richness and fertility increased in proportion as we drew near
that celebrated mart of lap-dogs and sausages.  A chain of
hills commands the city, variegated with green inclosures and
villas innumerable, almost every one of which has its grove of
chestnuts and cypresses.  On the highest acclivity of this
range appears the magnificent convent of Madonna del Monte,
embosomed in wood, and joined to the town by a corridor a league
in length.  This vast portico, ascending the steeps and
winding amongst the thickets, sometimes concealed and sometimes
visible, produces an effect wonderfully grand and singular.
I longed to have mounted the height by so extraordinary a
passage; and hope on some future day to be better acquainted with
Saint Maria del Monte.

At present I thought of little else, to say truth, but what I
had seen at Fiesso; and what I was to hear at Lucca.  The
anxiety inspired by the one, and impatience by the other,
rendered me shamefully insensible to the merits of Bologna (where
I passed near two hours), and of which I can add nothing but that
it is very much out of humour, an earthquake and Cardinal
Buoncompagni having disarranged both land and people.  For
half-a-year the ground continued trembling; and for these last
months, the legate and senators have grumbled and scratched
incessantly; so that, between natural and political commotions,
the Bolognese must have passed an agreeable summer.

Such a report of the situation of things, you may suppose, was
not likely to retard my journey.  I put off delivering my
letters to another opportunity; ran up a tall slender tower as
high as the Campanile di San Marco, by way of exercise; and
proceeded immediately after dinner towards the mountains.
We were soon in the midst of crags and stony channels, that
stream with ten thousand rills in the winter season, but during
the summer months reflect every sunbeam, and harbour half the
scorpions in the country.

For many a toilsome league our prospect consisted of nothing
but dreary hillocks and intervening wastes, more barren and
mournful than those to which Mary Magdalene retired.
Sometimes a crucifix or chapel peeped out of the parched fern and
grasses, with which these desolate fields are clothed; and now
and then we met a goggle-eyed pilgrim trudging along, and staring
about him as if he waited only for night and opportunity to have
additional reasons for hurrying to Jerusalem.

During three or four hours that we continued ascending, the
scene increased in sterility and desolation; but, at the end of
our second post, the landscape began to alter for the better:
little green valleys at the base of tremendous steeps, discovered
themselves, scattered over with oaks, and freshened with running
waters, which the nakedness of the impending rocks set off to
advantage.  The sides of the cliffs in general consist of
rude misshapen masses; but their summits are smooth and verdant,
and continually browsed by herds of white goats, which were
gambolling on the edge of the precipices as we passed
beneath.

I joined one of these frisking assemblies, whose shadows were
stretched by the setting sun along the level herbage.  There
I sat a few minutes whilst they shook their beards at me, and
tried to scare me with all their horns; but I was not to be
frightened, and would offer up my adorations to departing day, in
spite of their caperings.  Being tired with skipping and
butting at me in vain, the whole herd trotted away, and I after
them.  They led me a dance from crag to crag and from
thicket to thicket.

It was growing dusky apace, and wreaths of smoke began to
ascend from the mysterious depths of the valleys.  I was
ignorant what monster inhabited such retirements, so gave over my
pursuit, lest some Polypheme or other might make me repent
it.  I looked around, the carriage was out of sight; but
hearing the neighing of horses at a distance, I soon came up with
them, and mounted another rapid ascent, whence an extensive tract
of cliff and forest land was discernible.

The rocks here formed a spacious terrace; along which I
continued surveying the distant groves, and marking the solemn
approach of night.  The sky was hung with storms, and a pale
moon seemed to advance with difficulty amongst broken and
tempestuous clouds.  It was an hour to reap plants with
brazen sickles, and to meditate upon revenge.

A chill wind blew from the highest peak of the Apennines,
inspiring evil, and making a dismal rustle amongst the woods of
chestnut that hung on the mountain’s side, through which we
were forced to pass.  I never heard such fatal murmurs; nor
felt myself so gloomily.  I walked out of the sound of the
carriage, where the glimmering moonlight prevailed, and began
interpreting the language of the leaves, not greatly to my own
advantage or that of any being in the universe.  I was no
prophet of good, but full of melancholy bodings, and something
that bordered upon despair.  Had I but commanded an oracle,
as ancient visionaries were wont, I should have thrown whole
nations into dismay.

How long I continued in this strange temper I cannot pretend
to say, but believe it was midnight before we emerged from the
oracular forest, and saw faintly before us the huts of Lognone,
where we were to sleep.  This blessed hamlet is suspended on
the brow of a bleak mountain, and every gust that stirs shakes
the whole village to its foundations.  At our approach two
hags stalked forth with lanterns and invited us with a grin,
which I shall always remember, to a dish of mustard and
crow’s gizzards, a dish I was more than half afraid of
tasting, lest it should change me to some bird of darkness,
condemned to mope eternally on the black rafters of the
cottage.

After repeated supplications we procured a few eggs, and some
faggots to make a fire.  Its blaze gave me courage to hear
the hollow blasts that whistled in the crevices; and pitching my
bed in a warm corner, I soon fell asleep, and forgot all my cares
and inquietudes.

September
14
th
.—The sun had not been long
above the horizon, before we set forward upon a craggy pavement
hewn out of the rough bosom of the cliffs and precipices.
Scarce a tree was visible, and the few that presented themselves
began already to shed their leaves.  The raw nipping air of
this desert with difficulty spares a blade of vegetation; and in
the whole range of these extensive eminences I could not discover
a single corn-field or pasture.  Inhabitants, you may guess,
there were none.  I would defy even a Scotch highlander to
find means of subsistence in so rude a soil.

Towards midday, we had surmounted the dreariest part of our
journey, and began to perceive a milder landscape.  The
climate improved as well as the prospect, and after a continual
descent of several hours, we saw groves and villages in the dips
of the hills, and met a string of mules and horses laden with
fruit.  I purchased some figs and peaches from this little
caravan, and spreading my repast upon a bank, baked in the
sunshine, and gathered large spikes of lavender in full
bloom.

Continuing our route, we bid adieu to the realms of poverty
and barrenness, and entered a cultivated vale sheltered by woody
acclivities.  Among these we wound along, the peasants
singing upon the hill, and driving their cattle to springs by the
road’s side; near one of which we dined in a patriarchal
manner, and afterwards pursued our course through a grove of
taper cypresses, waving with the cool gales of the evening.
The heights were suffused with a ruddy glow, proceeding from the
light pink clouds which floated on the horizon.  No others
were to be seen.  All nature seemed in a happy tranquil
state; the herds penned in their folds, and every rustic going to
repose.  I shared the general calm for the first time this
many a tedious hour; and traversed the dales in peace, abandoned
to flattering hopes and gay illusions.  The full moon shone
propitiously upon me as I ascended a hill, and discovered
Florence at a distance, surrounded with gardens and terraces,
rising one above another.  The serene moonlight on the pale
grey tints of the olive, gave an Elysian, visionary appearance to
the landscape.  I never beheld so mild a sky, nor such soft
gleams: the mountains were veiled in azure mists, which concealed
their rugged summits; and the plains in vapours, that smoothed
their irregularities, and diffused a faint aërial hue, to
which no description can render justice.  I could have
contemplated such scenery for hours, and was sorry when I found
myself shut up from it by the gates of Florence.  We passed
several lofty palaces of the true Tuscan order, with rustic
arcades and stout columns, whose solidity and magnificence were
not diminished by the shades of midnight.  Whilst these
grand masses lay dark and solemn, the smooth flagstone, with
which every street is paved, received a chequered gleam, and the
Arno, the brightest radiance.  Though tired with my jumble
over the Apennines, I could not resist the temptation of walking
upon the banks of so celebrated a river, and crossing its
bridges, which still echoed with music and conversation.
Having gratified the first impulse of curiosity, I returned to
Vaninis, and slept as well as my impatience would allow, till it
was time next morning (September 15th), to visit the gallery, and
worship the Venus de Medicis.  I felt, upon entering this
world of taste and elegance, as if I could have taken up my abode
in it for ever; but confused with the multitude of objects, I
knew not where to turn myself, and ran childishly by the ample
ranks of sculptures, like a butterfly in a parterre, that skims
before it fixes, over ten thousand flowers.

Having taken my course down one side of the gallery, I turned
the angle and discovered another long perspective, equally stored
with prodigies of bronze and marble; paintings on the walls, on
the ceilings, in short, everywhere.  A minute brought me,
vast as it was, to the extremity of this range; then, flying down
a third, adorned in the same delightful manner, I paused under
the bust of Jupiter Olympius; and began to reflect a little more
maturely upon the company in which I found myself.
Opposite, appeared the majestic features of Minerva, breathing
divinity; and Cybele, the mother of the gods.

I bowed low to these awful powers, but seeing a black figure
just by, whose attitude seemed to announce the deity of sleep, I
made immediately up to it.  You know my fondness for this
drowsy personage, and that it is not the first time I have
quitted the most splendid society for him.  I found him, at
present, of touchstone, with the countenance of a towardly brat,
sleeping ill through indigestion.  The artist had not
conceived such high ideas of the god as live in my bosom, or else
he never would have represented him with so little grace or
dignity.

Displeased at finding my favourite subject profaned, I
perceived the lively transports of enthusiasm began in some
degree to be dissipated, and I felt myself calm enough to follow
the herd of guides and spectators from chamber to chamber and
cabinet to cabinet, without falling into errors of rapture and
inspiration.  We were led slowly and moderately through the
large rooms, containing the portraits of painters, good, bad, and
indifferent, from Raffaelle to Liotard; then into a museum of
bronzes, which would afford both amusement and instruction for
years.

To one who can never behold an ancient lamp or tripod without
the associations of those who sacrificed on the one and meditated
by the other, imagine what pleasures such a repository must have
communicated.

When I had alarmed, not satisfied, my curiosity by rapidly
running over this multitude of candelabra, urns, and sacred
utensils, we entered a small luminous apartment, surrounded with
cases richly decorated, and filled with the most exquisite models
of workmanship in bronze and various metals, classed in exact
order.  Here are crowds of diminutive deities and tutelary
lars, to whom the superstition of former days attributed those
midnight murmurs which were believed to presage the misfortunes
of a family.  Amongst these now neglected images are
preserved a vast number of talismans, cabalistic amulets, and
other grotesque relics of ancient credulity.

In the centre of the room, I remarked a table, beautifully
formed of polished gems, and, hard by it, the statue of a genius
with his familiar serpent, and all his attributes; the guardian
of the treasured antiquities.  From this chamber we were
conducted into another, which opens to that part of the gallery
where the busts of Adrian and Antinous are placed.  Two
pilasters, delicately carved in trophies and clusters of ancient
armour, stand on each side of the entrance; within are several
perfumed cabinets of miniatures, and a single column of Oriental
alabaster about ten feet in height,

“Lucido e terso,
e bianco, più che latte.”

I put my guide’s patience to the proof, by remaining
much longer than any one else ever did, in admiring the pillar,
and rummaging the drawers of the cabinets.  At last, the
musk with which they are impregnated obliged me to desist, and I
moved on to a suite of saloons, with low arched roofs, glittering
with arabesque, in azure and gold.  Several medallions
appear amongst the wreaths of foliage, tolerably well painted,
with representations of splendid feasts and tournaments for which
Florence was once so famous.

A vast collection of small pictures, most of them Flemish,
covers the walls of these apartments.  But nothing struck me
more than a Medusa’s head by that surprising genius
Leonardo da Vinci.  It appears just severed from the body,
and cast on the damp pavement of a cavern: a deadly paleness
covers the countenance, and the mouth exhales a pestilential
vapour: the snakes, which fill almost the whole picture,
beginning to untwist their folds; one or two seemed already crept
away, and crawling up the rock in company with toads and other
venomous reptiles.

The colouring of these disgustful objects is faithful to a
great degree; the effect of light, prodigious; the whole so
masterly that I could not help entering into this description;
though I fear to little purpose, as words at best convey but a
weak idea of objects addressed to the sight alone.

Here are a great many Polemburgs: one in particular, the
strangest I ever beheld.  Instead of those soft scenes of
woods and waterfalls he is in general so fond of representing, he
has chosen for his subject Virgil ushering Dante into the regions
of eternal punishment, amidst the ruins of flaming edifices that
glare across the infernal waters.  These mournful towers
harbour innumerable shapes, all busy in preying upon the
damned.  One capital devil, in the form of an enormous
lobster, seems very strenuously employed in mumbling a miserable
mortal, who sprawls, though in vain, to escape from his
claws.  This performance, whimsical as it is, retains all
that softness of tint and delicacy of pencil for which Polemburg
is so renowned.

Had not the subject so palpably contradicted the execution as
to become remarkable, I should have passed it over, like a
thousand more, and brought you immediately to the Tribune.
I dare say our sensations were similar on entering this
apartment.  Need I say I was enchanted the moment I set my
feet within it, and saw full before me the Venus de
Medicis?  The warm ivory hue of the original marble is a
beauty no copy has ever imitated, and the softness of the limbs
exceeded the liveliest idea I had formed to myself of their
perfection.

Their symmetry every artist is acquainted with; but do you
recollect a faint ruddy cast in the hair, which admirably
relieves the whiteness of the forehead?  This circumstance,
though perhaps accidental, struck me as peculiarly charming; it
increased the illusion, and helped me to imagine I beheld a
breathing divinity.

When I had taken my eyes reluctantly from this beautiful
object, I cast them upon a Morpheus of white marble, which lies
slumbering at the feet of the goddess in the form of a graceful
child.  A dormant lion serves him for a pillow: two ample
wings, carved with the utmost delicacy, are gathered under him;
two others, budding from his temples, half concealed by a flow of
lovely ringlets.  His languid hands scarce hold a bunch of
poppies: near him creeps a lizard, just yielding to his
influence.  Nothing can be more just than the expression of
sleep in the countenance of the little divinity.  His lion
too seems perfectly lulled, and rests his muzzle upon his
fore-paws as quiet as a domestic mastiff.  I contemplated
the god with infinite satisfaction, till I felt an agreeable
sleepiness steal over my senses, and should have liked very well
to doze away a few hours by his side.  My ill-humour at
seeing this deity so grossly sculptured in the gallery, was
dissipated by the gracefulness of his appearance in the
Tribune.  I was now contented, for the artist, (to whom the
Lord give a fair seat in paradise!) had realized my ideas; and,
if I may venture my opinion, sculpture never arrived to higher
perfection, or, at the same time, kept more justly within its
province.  Sleeping figures with me always produce the
finest illusion.  I easily persuade myself that I behold the
very personage, cast into the lethargic state which is meant to
be represented, and I can gaze whole hours upon them with
complacency.  But when I see an archer in the very act of
discharging his arrow, a dancer with one foot in the air, or a
gladiator extending his fist to all eternity, I grow tired, and
ask, When will they perform what they are about?  When will
the bow twang? the foot come to the ground? or the fist meet its
adversary?  Such wearisome attitudes I can view with
admiration, but never with pleasure.  The wrestlers, for
example, in the same apartment, filled me with disgust: I cried
out, For heaven’s sake! give the throw, and have
done.  In taking my turn round the enchanted circle, I
discovered still, another Morpheus; stretched carelessly on a
mantle, with poppies in his hands; but no wings grow from his
temples, nor lion supports his head.  A moth just issuing
from his chrysalis is the only being which seems to have felt his
soporific influence; whereas the other god I have mentioned may
vaunt the glory of subduing the most formidable of animals.

The morning was gone before I could snatch myself from the
Tribune.  In my way home, I looked into the cathedral, an
enormous fabric, inlaid with the richest marbles, and covered
with stars and chequered work, like an old-fashioned
cabinet.  The architect seems to have turned his building
inside out; nothing in art being more ornamented than the
exterior, and few churches so simple within.  The nave is
vast and solemn, the dome amazingly spacious, with the high altar
in its centre, inclosed by a circular arcade near two hundred
feet in diameter.  There is something imposing in this
decoration, as it suggests the idea of a sanctuary, into which
none but the holy ought to penetrate.  However profane I
might feel myself, I took the liberty of entering, and sat myself
down in a niche.  Not a ray of light reaches this sacred
inclosure, but through the medium of narrow windows, high in the
dome and richly painted.  A sort of yellow tint
predominates, which gives additional solemnity to the altar, and
paleness to the votary before it.  I was sensible of the
effect, and obtained at least the colour of sanctity.

Having remained some time in this pious hue, I returned home
and feasted upon grapes and ortolans with great edification; then
walked to one of the bridges across the Arno, and surveyed the
hills at a distance, purpled by the declining sun.  Its mild
beams tempted me to the garden of Boboli, which lies behind the
Palazzo Pitti, stretched out on the side of a mountain.  I
ascended terrace after terrace, robed by a thick underwood of hay
and myrtle, above which rise several nodding towers, and a long
sweep of venerable wall, almost entirely concealed by ivy.
You would have been enraptured with the broad masses of shade and
dusky alleys that opened as I advanced, with white statues of
fauns and sylvans glimmering amongst them; some of which pour
water into sarcophagi of the purest marble, covered with antique
relievos.  The capitals of columns and ancient friezes are
scattered about as seats.

On these I reposed myself, and looked up to the cypress groves
spiring above the thickets; then, plunging into their
retirements, I followed a winding path, which led me by a series
of steep ascents to a green platform overlooking the whole extent
of wood, with Florence deep beneath, and the tops of the hills
which encircle it, jagged with pines; here and there a convent,
or villa, whitening in the sun.  This scene extends as far
as the eye can reach.

Still ascending I attained the brow of the mountain, and had
nothing but the fortress of Belvedere, and two or three open
porticos above me.  On this elevated situation, I found
several walks of trellis-work, clothed with luxuriant vines, that
produce to my certain knowledge the most delicious
clusters.  A colossal statue of Ceres, her hands extended in
the act of scattering fertility over the prospect, crowns the
summit, where I lingered to mark the landscape fade, and the
bright skirts of the western sun die gradually away.

Then descending alley after alley, and bank after bank, I came
to the orangery in front of the palace, disposed in a grand
amphitheatre, with marble niches relieved by dark foliage, out of
which spring tall aërial cypresses.  This spot brought
the scenery of an antique Roman garden full into my mind.  I
expected every instant to be called to the table of Lucullus hard
by, in one of the porticoes, and to stretch myself on his purple
triclinias; but waiting in vain for a summons till the approach
of night, I returned delighted with a ramble that had led me so
far into antiquity.

Friday
,
September
16
th
.—My
impatience to hear Pacchierotti called me up with the sun.
I blessed a day which was to give me the greatest of musical
pleasures, and travelled gaily towards Lucca, along a fertile
plain, bounded by rocky hills, and scattered over with towns and
villages.  We passed Pistoia in haste, and about three in
the afternoon entered the Lucchese territory, by a clean, paved
road, which runs through some of the pleasantest copses
imaginable, bordered with a variety of heaths and broom in
blossom.  Sometimes it conducted us down slopes, overgrown
with shrubby chestnuts and arbor vitæ; sometimes between
groves of cypresses and pines laden with cones: a red soil
peeping forth from the vegetation adds to the richness of the
landscape, which swells all the way into gentle acclivities: and
at about seven or eight miles from the city spreads into
mountains, green to their very summits, and diversified with
gardens and palaces.  A more pleasing scenery can with
difficulty be imagined: I was quite charmed with beholding it, as
I knew very well that the opera would keep me a long while
chained down in its neighbourhood.

Happy for me that the environs of Lucca were so beautiful;
since I defy almost any city to contain more ugliness within its
walls.  Narrow streets and dismal alleys; wide gutters and
cracked pavements; everybody in black, like mourners for the
gloom of their habitations, which, however, are large and lofty
enough of conscience; but having all grated windows, they convey
none but dark and dungeon-like ideas.  My spirits fell many
degrees upon entering this sable capital; and when I found Friday
was meagre day, in every sense of the word, with its inhabitants,
and no opera to be performed, I grew terribly out of humour, and
shut myself up in a chamber of the inn, which, to complete my
misfortune, was crowded with human lumber.  Instead of a
delightful symphony, I heard nothing for some time but the
clatter of plates and the swearing of waiters.

Amongst the number of my tormentors was a whole Genoese family
of distinction; very fat and sleek, and terribly addicted to the
violin.  Hearing of my fondness for music, they speedily got
together a few scrapers, and began such an academia as drove me
to one end of the room, whilst they possessed the other.
The hopes and heir of the family—a coarse chubby dolt of
about eighteen—played out of all time, and during the
interval of repose he gave his elbow, burst out into a torrent of
commonplace, which completed, you may imagine, my felicity.

Pacchierotti, whom they all worshipped in their heavy way, sat
silent the while in a corner; the second soprano warbled, not
absolutely ill, at the harpsichord; whilst the old lady, young
lady, and attendant females, kept ogling him with great
perseverance.  Those who could not get in, squinted through
the crevices of the door.  Abbés and greyhounds were
fidgeting continually without.  In short, I was so worried
that, pleading headaches and lassitudes, I escaped about ten
o’clock, and shook myself when I got safe to my apartment,
like a spaniel just fresh from a dripping copse.

LETTER XIV.

Lucca
,

September
25
th
.

You ask me how I pass my time.  Generally upon the hills,
in wild spots where the arbutus flourishes: from whence I may
catch a glimpse of the distant sea; my horse tied to a cypress,
and myself cast upon the grass, like Palmarin of Oliva, with a
tablet and pencil in my hand, a basket of grapes by my side, and
a crooked stick to shake down the chestnuts.  I have bidden
adieu, several days ago, to the dinners and glories of the town,
and only come thither in an evening, just time enough for the
grand march which precedes Pacchierotti in
Quinto
Fabio
.  Sometimes he accompanies me in my excursions, to
the utter discontent of the Lucchese, who swear I shall ruin
their opera, by leading him such confounded rambles amongst the
mountains, and exposing him to the inclemency of winds and
showers.  One day they made a vehement remonstrance, but in
vain; for the next, away we trotted over hill and dale, and
stayed so late in the evening, that cold and hoarseness were the
consequence.

The whole republic was thrown into commotion, and some of its
prime ministers were deputed to harangue Pacchierotti upon the
rides he had committed.  Billingsgate never produced such
furious orators.  Had the safety of their mighty state
depended upon this imprudent excursion, they could not have
vociferated with greater violence.  You know I am rather
energetic, and, to say truth, I had very nearly got into a scrape
of importance, and drawn down the execrations of the Gonfalonier
and all his council upon my head, in defending him, and in openly
declaring our intention of taking, next morning, another ride
over the rocks, and absolutely losing ourselves in the clouds
which veil their acclivities.  These threats were put into
execution, and yesterday we made a tour of about thirty miles
upon the highlands, and visited a variety of castles and
palaces.

The Conte Nobili conducted us, a noble Lucchese, but born in
Flanders and educated at Paris.  He possesses the greatest
elegance of imagination, and a degree of sensibility rarely met
with upon our gross planet.  The way did not appear tedious
in such company.  The sun was tempered by light clouds, and
a soft autumnal haze rested upon the hills, covered with shrubs
and olives.  The distant plains and forests appeared tinted
with deep blue, and I am now convinced the azure so prevalent in
Velvet Breughel’s landscapes is not exaggerated.

After riding for six or seven miles along the cultivated
levels, we began to ascend a rough slope, overgrown with
chestnuts; here and there some vines streaming in garlands
displayed their clusters.  A great many loose fragments and
stumps of ancient pomegranates perplexed our route, which
continued, turning and winding through this sort of wilderness,
till it opened on a sudden to the side of a lofty mountain,
covered with tufted groves, amongst which hangs the princely
castle of the Garzonis, on the very side of a precipice.

Alcina could not have chosen a more romantic situation.
The garden lies extended beneath, gay with flowers, and
glittering with compartments of spar, which, though in no great
purity of taste, has an enchanted effect for the first
time.  Two large marble basins, with jet-d’eaux
seventy feet in height, divide the parterres; from the extremity
of which rises a rude cliff, shaded with firs and ilex, and cut
into terraces.

Leaving our horses at the great gate of this magic inclosure,
we passed through the spray of the fountains, and mounting an
almost endless flight of steps, entered an alley of oranges, and
gathered ripe fruit from the trees.  Whilst we were thus
employed, the sun broke from the clouds, and lighted up the vivid
green of the vegetation; at the same time spangling the waters,
which pour copiously down a succession of rocky terraces, and
sprinkle the impending citron-trees with perpetual dew.
These streams issue from a chasm in the cliff, surrounded by
cypresses, which conceal by their thick branches some pavilions
with baths.  Above arises a colossal statue of Fame, boldly
carved, and in the very act of starting from the
precipices.  A narrow path leads up to the feet of the
goddess, on which I reclined; whilst a vast column of water
arched over my head, and fell, without even wetting me with its
spray, into the depths below.

I could with difficulty prevail upon myself to abandon this
cool recess, which the fragrance of bay and orange, extracted by
constant showers, rendered uncommonly luxurious.  At last I
consented to move on, through a dark wall of ilex, which, to the
credit of Signor Garzoni be it spoken, is suffered to grow as
wild and as forest-like as it pleases.  This grove is
suspended on the mountain side, whose summit is clothed with a
boundless wood of olives, and forms, by its azure colour, a
striking contrast with the deep verdure of its base.

After resting a few moments in the shade, we proceeded to a
long avenue (bordered by aloes in bloom, forming majestic
pyramids of flowers thirty feet high), which led us to the
palace.  This was soon run over.  Then, mounting our
horses, we wound amongst sunny vales, and inclosures with myrtle
hedges, till we came to a rapid steep.  We felt the heat
most powerfully in ascending it, and were glad to take refuge
under a bower of vines, which runs for miles along its summit,
almost without interruption.  These arbours afforded us both
shade and refreshment; I fell upon the clusters which formed our
ceiling, like a native of the north, unused to such luxuriance:
one of those Goths which Gray so poetically describes, who

“Scent the new fragrance of the breathing
rose,

And quaff the pendent vintage as it grows.”

I wish you had journeyed with us under this fruitful canopy,
and observed the partial sunshine through its transparent leaves,
and the glimpses of the blue sky it every now and then
admitted.  I say only every now and then, for in most places
a sort of verdant gloom prevailed, exquisitely agreeable in so
hot a day.

But such luxury did not last, you may suppose, for ever.
We were soon forced from our covert, and obliged to traverse a
mountain exposed to the sun, which had dispersed every cloud, and
shone with intolerable brightness.  On the other side of
this extensive eminence lies an agreeable hillock, surrounded by
others, woody and irregular.  Wide vineyards and fences of
Indian corn lay between, across which the Conte Nobili conducted
us to his house, where we found prepared a very comfortable
dinner.  We drank the growth of the spot, and defied
Constantia and the Cape to excel it.

Afterwards, retiring into a wood of the Marchese Mansi, with
neat pebble walks and trickling rivulets, we sipped coffee and
loitered till sunset.  It was then time to return: the dews
began to fall, and the mists to rise from the valleys.  The
profound calm and silence of evening threw us all three into our
reveries.  We went pacing along heedlessly, just as our
horses pleased, without hearing any sound but their steps.

Between nine and ten we entered the gates of Lucca.
Pacchierotti coughed, and half its inhabitants wished us at the
devil.

I think now I have detained you long enough with my
excursions: you must require a little repose; for my own part, I
am heartily tired.  I intended to say some things about
certain owls, amongst other grievances I am pestered with in this
republic; but shall cut them all short, and wish you good-night;
for the opera is already begun, and I would not miss the first
glorious recitative for the empire of Trebizond.

LETTER XV.

Livourno
,

October
2
nd
.

No sooner were we beyond the gates, than we found ourselves in
narrow roads, shut in by vines and grassy banks of canes and
osiers, rising high above our carriage, and waving their leaves
in the air.  Through the openings which sometimes intervene
we discovered a variety of hillocks clothed with shrubberies and
verdure, ruined towers looking out of the bushes, not one without
a romantic tale attending it.

This sort of scenery lasted till, passing the baths, we beheld
Pisa rising from an extensive plain, the most open we had as yet
seen in Italy, crossed by an aqueduct.  We were set down
immediately before the Duomo, which stands insulated in a verdant
opening, and is by far the most curious and highly finished
edifice my eyes ever viewed.  Don’t ask of what shape
or architecture; it is almost impossible to tell, so great is the
confusion of ornaments.  The capitals of the columns and
carvings of the architraves, as well as the form of the arches,
are evidently of Grecian design, but Gothic proportions.
The dome gives the mass an Oriental appearance, which helped to
bewilder me; in short, I have dreamed of such buildings, but
little thought they existed.  On one side you survey the
famous tower, as perfectly awry as I expected; on the other the
baptistery, a circular edifice distinct from the church and right
opposite its principal entrance, crowded with sculptures and
topped by the strangest of cupolas.

Having indulged our curiosity with this singular prospect for
some moments, we entered the cathedral and admired the stately
columns of porphyry and the rarest marbles, supporting a roof
which, like the rest of the building, shines with gold.  A
pavement of the brightest mosaic completes its magnificence: all
around are sculptures by M. Ang. Buonaroti, and paintings by the
most distinguished artists.  We examined them all, and then
walked down the nave and remarked the striking effect of the
baptistery, seen in perspective through the bronze portals, which
you know, I suppose, are covered with relievos of the finest
workmanship.  These noble valves were thrown wide open, and
we passed between to examine the alabaster fount in the
baptistery, constructed after the primitive ritual, and
exquisitely wrought.  Many palm trees appear amongst the
carved work, which seems to indicate the former connections of
the Pisanese with Palestine.

Our next object was the Campo Santo, which forms one side of
the opening in which the cathedral is situated.  The walls,
and Gothic tabernacle above the entrance, rising from a level
turf, appear as fresh as if built within the present century,
and, preserving a neat straw colour, have the cleanest effect
imaginable.  Our guide unlocking the gates, we entered a
spacious cloister, forming an oblong quadrangle, enclosing the
sacred earth of Jerusalem, conveyed hither about the period of
the crusades, in the days of Pisanese prosperity.  The holy
mould produces a rampant crop of weeds, but none are permitted to
spring from the pavement, which is entirely composed of tombs
with slabs and monumental inscriptions smoothly laid.
Ranges of slender pillars, formed of the whitest marble and
glistening in the sun, support the arcades, which are carved with
innumerable stars and roses, partly Gothic and partly
Saracenial.  Strange paintings of hell and the devil, mostly
taken from Dante’s rhapsodies, cover the walls of these
fantastic galleries, attributed to the venerable Giotto and
Bufalmacco, whom Boccace mentions in his
“Decamerone.”

Beneath, along the base of the columns, rows of pagan
sarcophagi are placed, to my no small surprise, as I could not
have supposed the Pisanese sufficiently tolerant to admit profane
sculptures within such consecrated precincts.  However,
there they are, as well as fifty other contradictory
ornaments.

I was quite seized by the strangeness of the place, and paced
fifty times round and round the cloisters, discovering at every
time some odd novelty.  When tired, I seated myself on a
fair slab of
giallo antico
, that looked a little cleaner
than its neighbours (which I only mention to identify the precise
point of view), and looking through the filigreed covering of the
arches, observed the domes of the cathedral, cupola of the
baptistery, and roof of the leaning tower rising above the leads,
and forming the strangest assemblage of pinnacles perhaps in
Europe.  The place is neither sad nor solemn; the arches are
airy, the pillars light, and there is so much caprice, such an
exotic look in the whole scene, that without any violent effort
of fancy one might imagine one’s self in fairyland.
Every object is new, every ornament original; the mixture of
antique sarcophagi with Gothic sepulchres, completes the vagaries
of the prospect, to which, one day or other, I think of
returning, to act a visionary part, hear visionary music, and
commune with sprites, for I shall never find in the whole
universe besides so whimsical a theatre.  It was between ten
and eleven when we entered the Campo Santo, and one o’clock
struck before I could be persuaded to leave it; and ’twas
the sun which then drove me away; whose heat was so powerful that
all the inhabitants of Pisa showed their wisdom by keeping within
doors.  Not an animal appeared in the streets, except five
camels laden with water, stalking along a range of garden walls
and pompous mansions, with an awning before every door.  We
were obliged to follow their steps, at least a quarter of a mile,
before we reached our inn.  Ice was the first thing I sought
after, and when I had swallowed an unreasonable portion, I began
not to think quite so much of the deserts of Africa, as the heat
and the camels had induced me a moment ago.

Early in the afternoon, we proceeded to Livourno through a
wild tract of forest, somewhat in the style of our English
parks.  The trees in some places formed such shady arbours,
that we could not resist the desire of walking beneath them, and
were well rewarded; for after struggling through a rough thicket,
we entered a lawn hemmed in by oaks and chestnuts, which extends
several leagues along the coast and conceals the prospect of the
ocean; but we heard its murmurs.

Nothing could be smoother or more verdant than the herbage,
which was sprinkled with daisies and purple crocuses, as in the
month of May.  I felt all the genial sensations of Spring
steal into my bosom, and was greatly delighted upon discovering
vast bushes of myrtle in bloom.  The softness of the air,
the sound of the distant surges, the evening gleams, and repose
of the landscape, quieted the tumult of my spirits, and I
experienced the calm of my infant hours.  I lay down in the
open turf-walks between the shrubberies, listlessly surveyed the
cattle browsing at a distance, and the blue hills that rose above
the foliage, and bounded the view.  During a few moments I
had forgotten every care; but when I began to inquire into my
happiness, I found it vanish.  I felt myself without those I
love most, in situations they would have warmly admired, and
without them these pleasant meads and woodlands were of little
avail.

We had not left this woody region far behind, when the
Fanalè began to lift itself above the horizon—the
Fanalè you have so often mentioned; the sky and ocean
glowing with amber light, and the ships out at sea appearing in a
golden haze, of which we have no conception in our northern
climates.  Such a prospect, together with the fresh gales
from the Mediterranean, charmed me; I hurried immediately to the
port and sat on a reef of rocks, listening to the waves that
broke amongst them.

LETTER XVI.

October
3
rd
.—I went, as you would have
done, to walk on the mole as soon as the sun began to shine upon
it.  Its construction you are no stranger to; therefore I
think I may spare myself the trouble of saying anything about it,
except that the port which it embraces is no longer
crowded.  Instead of ten ranks of vessels there are only
three, and those consist chiefly of Corsican galleys, that look
as poor and tattered as their masters.  Not much attention
did I bestow upon such objects, but, taking my seat at the
extremity of the quay, surveyed the smooth plains of ocean, the
coast scattered over with watch-towers, and the rocky isle of
Gorgona, emerging from the morning mists, which still lingered
upon the horizon.

Whilst I was musing upon the scene, and calling up all that
train of ideas before my imagination, which possessed your own
upon beholding it, an ancient figure, with a beard that would
have suited a sea-god, stepped out of a boat, and tottering up
the steps of the quay, presented himself before me with a basket
in his hand.  He stayed dripping a few moments before he
pronounced a syllable, and when he began his discourse, I was in
doubt whether I should not have moved off in a hurry, there was
something so wan and singular in his countenance.  Except
this being, no other was visible for a quarter of a mile at
least.  I knew not what strange adventure I might be upon
the point of commencing, or what message I was to expect from the
submarine divinities.  However, after all my conjectures,
the figure turned out to be no other than an old fisherman, who,
having picked up a few large branches of red coral, offered them
to sale.  I eagerly made the purchase, and thought myself a
favourite of Neptune, since he allowed me to acquire for next to
nothing some of his most beautiful ornaments.

My bargain thus expeditiously finished, I ran along the quay
with my basket of coral, and, jumping into a boat, was rowed back
to the gate of the port.  The carriage waited there; I
filled it with jasmine, shut myself up in the shade of the green
blinds, and was driven away at a rate that favoured my
impatience.  We bowled smoothly over the lawns I attempted
describing in my last letter, amongst myrtles in flower, that
would have done honour to the island of Juan Fernandes.

Arrived at Pisa, I scarcely allowed myself a moment to revisit
the Campo Santo, but, after taking my usual portion of ice and
pomegranate-seeds, hurried on to Lucca as fast as horses could
carry me, threw the whole idle town into a stare by my speedy
return, and gave myself up to
Q. Fabio
.

Next day (October 4th) was passed in running over my old
haunts upon the hills, and bidding farewell to several venerable
chestnuts, for which I had contracted a sort of friendship by
often experiencing their protection.  I could not help
feeling some melancholy sensation when I turned round the last
time to bid them adieu.  Who knows but some dryad enclosed
within them was conscious of my gratitude, and noted it down on
the bark of her tree?  It was late before I finished my
excursion, and soon after I had walked as usual upon the ramparts
the opera began.

LETTER XVII.

Florence
,

October
5
th
.

It was not without regret that I forced myself from
Lucca.  We had all the same road to go over again, that
brought us to this important republic, but we broke down by way
of variety.  The wind was chill, the atmosphere damp and
clogged with unwholesome vapours, through which we were forced to
walk for a league, whilst our chaise lagged after us.

Taking shelter in a miserable cottage, we remained shivering
and shaking till the carriage was in some sort of order, and then
proceeded so slowly that we did not arrive at Florence till late
in the evening.  We found an apartment over the Arno
prepared for our reception.  The river, swollen with rains,
roared like a mountain torrent.  Throwing open my windows, I
viewed its agitated course by the light of the moon, half
concealed in stormy clouds, which hung above the fortress of the
Belvedere, and cast a lowering gleam over the hills, which rise
above the town, and wave with cypress.  I sat contemplating
the effect of the shadows on the bridge, on the heights of
Boboli, and the mountain covered with pale olive groves, amongst
which a convent is situated, till the moon sunk into the darkest
quarter of the sky, and a bell began to toll.  Its sullen
sound filled me with sadness.  I closed the casements,
called for lights, ran to a harpsichord Vannini had prepared for
me, and played somewhat in the strain of Jomelli’s

Miserere
.

October
6
th
.—Every cloud was dispersed
when I arose; the sunbeams glittered on the stream, and the
purity and transparency of the tether added new charms to the
woody eminences around.  Such was the clearness of the air
that even objects on the distant mountains were
distinguishable.  I felt quite revived by the exhilarating
prospect, and walked in the splendour of sunshine to the porticos
beneath the famous gallery; then to an ancient castle, raised in
the days of the republic, which fronts the grand piazza: colossal
statues and venerable terms are placed before it.  On one
side a fountain clung round with antique figures of bronze, by
John of Bologna, so admirably wrought as to hold me several
minutes in astonishment; on the other, three lofty Gothic arches,
and under one of them the Perseus of Benvenuto Cellini, raised on
a pedestal, incomparably designed and executed; which I could not
behold uninterested, since its author has ever occupied a
distinguished place in my kalendar of genius.  Having
examined some groups of sculptures, by Baccio Bandinelli and
other mighty artists, I entered the court of the castle, dark and
deep, as if hewn out of a rock; surrounded by a vaulted arcade,
covered with arabesque ornaments, and supported by pillars as
uncouthly carved as those of Persepolis.  In the midst
appears a marble fount with an image of bronze, that looks quite
strange and cabalistic.  I leaned against it, to look up to
the summits of the walls, which rise to a vast height, from
whence springs a slender tower.  Above, in the apartments of
the castle, were preserved numbers of curious cabinets, tables of
inlaid gems, and a thousand rarities, collected by the house of
Medici, but exposed by the present sovereign of Tuscany to public
sale.

It was not without indignation that I learnt this new mark of
contempt which the Austrians bestow on the memory of those
illustrious patrons of the Arts; whom, being unwilling to
imitate, they affect to despise as a race of merchants, whose
example it would be abasing their dignity to follow.

I could have stayed much longer to enjoy the novelty and
strangeness of the place; but it was right to pay some
compliments of form.  That duty over, I dined in peace and
solitude, read over your letters, and repaired, as evening drew
on, to the thickets of Boboli.

What a serene sky! what mellowness in the tints of the
mountains!  A purple haze concealed the bases, whilst their
summits were invested with saffron light, discovering every white
cot and every copse that clothed their declivities.  The
prospect widened as I ascended the terraces of the garden.

After traversing many long alleys, brown with impending
foliage, I emerged into a green opening on the brow of the hill,
and seated myself under the statue of Ceres.  From this high
point I surveyed the mosaic cupola of the Duomo, its quaint
turret, and one still more grotesque in its neighbourhood, built
not improbably in the style of ancient Etruria.  Beyond this
singular group of buildings a plain stretches itself far and
wide, most richly scattered over with villas, gardens, and groves
of pine and olive, quite to the feet of the mountains.

After I had marked the sun’s going down, I went through
a plat of vines hanging on the steeps, to a little eminence,
round which the wood grows wilder and more luxuriant, and the
cypresses shoot up to a surprising elevation.  The pruners
have spared this sylvan corner, and suffered the bays to put
forth their branches, and the ilex to dangle over the walks, many
of whose entrances are nearly overgrown.  I enjoyed the
gloom of these shady arbours, in the midst of which rises a lofty
pavilion with galleries running round it, not unlike the idea one
forms of Turkish chiosks.  Beneath lies a garden of vines
and rose-trees, which I visited, and found a spring under a
rustic arch of grotto-work, fringed round with ivy.
Millions of fish inhabit here, of that beautiful glittering
species which comes from China.  This golden nation were
leaping after insects, as I stood gazing upon the deep, clear
water, and listening to the drops that trickle from the
cove.  Opposite to which, at the end of an alley of vines,
you discover an oval bason, and in the midst of it a statue of
Ganymede, sitting reclined upon the eagle, full of that graceful
languor so peculiarly Grecian.  Whilst I was musing on the
margin of the spring (for I returned to it after casting a look
upon the sculpture), the moon rose above the tufted foliage of
the terraces.  Her silver brightness was strongly contrasted
by the deep green of the holm-oak and bay, amongst which I
descended by several flights of stairs, with neat marble
balustrades crowned by vases of aloes.

It was about seven o’clock, and everybody was jumbling
to my Lord T—’s, who lives in a fine house all over
blue and silver, with stuffed birds, alabaster cupids, and a
thousand prettinesses more; but, after all, neither he nor his
abode are worth mentioning.  I found a deal of slopping and
sipping of tea going forwards, and many dawdlers assembled.

As I can say little good of the party, I had better shut the
door, and conduct you to the opera, which is really a striking
spectacle.  However, it being addressed to the sight alone,
I was soon tired, and gave myself up to conversation.
Bedini, first soprano, put my patience to severe proof, during
the few minutes I attended.  You never beheld such a
porpoise.  If these animals were to sing, I should
conjecture it would be in his style.  You may suppose how
often I invoked Pacchierotti, and regretted the lofty melody of

Quinto Fabio
.  Everybody seemed as well contented as
if there were no such thing as good music in the world, except a
Neapolitan duchess, who delighted me by her vivacity.  We
took our fill of maledictions, and went home equally pleased with
each other for having mutually execrated both singers and
audience.

LETTER XVIII.

October
22
nd
.—They say the air is worse
this year at Rome than ever, and that it would be madness to go
thither during its malign influence.  This was very bad news
indeed to one heartily tired of Florence, at least of its
society.  Merciful powers! what a set harbour within its
walls! * * * * * You may imagine I do not take vast or vehement
delight in this company, though very ingenious, praiseworthy,
etc.  The woods of the Cascini shelter me every morning; and
there grows an old crooked ilex at their entrance, twisting round
a pine, upon whose branches I sit for hours,—hear, without
feeling, the showers trickling above my head, and see the cattle
browsing peacefully in their pastures, which hazel copses,
Italian pines, and groves of cypress enclose.

In the afternoon I never fail hiding myself in the thickets of
Boboli, and marking the golden glimmer of sunset between their
leaves.  The other evening I varied my walks, and ascended
one of those pleasant hills
[214]
which rise in the
vicinity of the city, and command a variegated scene of spires,
towns, villas, cots, and gardens.  On the right, as you
stand upon the brow, appears Fesule with its turrets and white
houses, covering a rocky mount; to the left, the vast Val
d’Arno lost in immensity.  A Franciscan convent stands
on the summit of the eminence, wrapped up in ancient cypresses,
which hinder its holy inhabitants from seeing too much of so gay
a view.  The paved ascent leading up to their abode receives
also a shade from the cypresses which border it.  Beneath
which venerable avenue, crosses with inscriptions are placed at
stated distances, to mark the various moments of Christ’s
passion; as when fainting under His burden He halted to repose
Himself, or when He met His afflicted mother (“Giesu
incontra la fua afflitta madre”).

Above, at the end of the perspective, rises a chapel designed
with infinite taste and simple elegance by M. A.
Buonarotti.  Further on, an ancient church, in the corrupt
Greek style of the primitive Christians, incrusted with white
marble, porphyry, and verd antique.  The interior presents a
crowded assemblage of ornaments, elaborate mosaic pavements, and
inlaid work without end.  The high altar, placed in a
semicircular recess, which reminded me of the church at Torcello,
glitters with barbaric paintings on a gold ground, and receives
the strongest glow of light imaginable from five windows, filled
up with transparent marble clouded like tortoiseshell.  A
smooth polished staircase leads to this sacred place: another
brought me to a subterraneous chapel, supported by confused
groups of variegated pillars, just visible by the glimmer of
lamps.  I thought of the Zancaroon at Cordova, and began
reciting the first verses of the Koran.

Passing on not unawed, I followed some flights of steps, which
terminate in the neat cloisters of the convent, in perfect
preservation, but totally deserted.  Ranges of citron and
aloes fill up the quadrangle, whose walls are hung with
superstitious pictures most singularly fancied.  The Jesuits
were the last tenants of this retirement, and seem to have had
great reason for their choice.  Its peace and stillness
delighted me.

Next day a very opposite scene engaged me, though much against
my will.  Her R. H. the G. Duchess having produced a
princess in the night, everybody put on grand gala in the
morning, and I was carried, along with the glittering tide of
courtiers, ministers, and ladies, to see the christening.
After hearing the Grand Duke talk politics for some time, the
doors of a temporary chapel were thrown open.  Trumpets
flourished, processions marched, and the archbishop began his
business at an altar of massive gold, placed under a yellow silk
pavilion, with pyramids of lights before it.  Wax tapers,
though it was noon-day, shone in every corner of the
apartments.  Two rows of pages, gorgeously accoutred, and
holding enormous torches, stood on each side his Royal Highness,
and made him the prettiest courtesies imaginable, to the sound of
an execrable band of music, though led by Nardini.  The poor
old archbishop, who looked very piteous and saint-like, struck up
the Te Deum with a quavering voice, and the rest followed him
full gallop.

That ceremony being despatched (for his R. H. was in a mighty
fidget to shrink back into his beloved obscurity), the crowd
dispersed, and I went, with a few others, to dine at my Lord
Tilney’s.

Evening drawing on, I ran to throw myself into the woods of
Boboli, and remained till it was night in their profound
recesses.  Really this garden is enough to bewilder an
enthusiastic spirit; there is something so solemn in its shades,
its avenues, and spires of cypresses.  When I had mused for
many a melancholy hour amongst them, I emerged into the orangery
before the palace, which overlooks the largest district of the
town, and beheld, as I slowly descended the road which leads up
to it, certain bright lights glancing across the cupola of the
Duomo and the points of the highest towers.  At first I
thought them meteors, or those illusive fires which often dance
before the eye of my imagination; but soon I was convinced of
their reality: for in a few minutes the battlements of the old
castle, which I remember mentioning in a former letter, shone
with lamps; the lantern of the cathedral was lighted up on a
sudden; whilst a stream of torches ran along its fantastic
turrets.

I enjoyed this prospect at a distance: when near, its pleasure
was greatly diminished, for half the fish in the town were frying
to rejoice the hearts of H. R. Highness’s loyal subjects,
and bonfires blazing in every street and alley.  Hubbubs and
stinks of every denomination drove me quickly to the theatre; but
that was all glitter and glare.  No taste, no arrangement,
paltry looking-glasses, and rat’s-tail candles.  I had
half a mind to return to Boboli.

LETTER XIX.

October
23
rd
.—Do you recollect our evening
rambles last year upon the hill of pines? and the dark valley
where we used to muse in the twilight?  I remember we often
fancied the scene like Valombrosa; and vowed, if ever an occasion
offered, to visit that deep retirement.  I had put off the
execution of this pilgrimage from day to day till the warm
weather was gone; and the Florentines declared I should be frozen
if I attempted it.  Everybody stared last night at the opera
when I told them I was going to bury myself in fallen leaves, and
hear no music but their rustlings.

Mr. — was just as eager as myself to escape the
chit-chat and nothingness of Florence; so we finally determined
upon our expedition, and mounting our horses, set out this
morning, happily without any company but the spirit which led us
along.  We had need of inspiration, since nothing else, I
think, would have tempted us over such dreary, uninteresting
hillocks as rise from the banks of the Arno.  The hoary
olive is their principal vegetation; so that Nature, in this part
of the country, seems in a withering decrepit state, and may not
unaptly be compared to “an old woman clothed in
grey.”  However, we did not suffer the prospect to
damp our enthusiasm, which was the better preserved for
Valombrosa.

About half way, our palfreys thought proper to look out for
some oats, and I to creep into a sort of granary in the midst of
a barren waste, scattered over with white rocks, that reflected
more heat than I cared for, although I had been told snow and ice
were to be my portion.  Seating myself on the floor between
heaps of corn, I reached down a few purple clusters of Muscadine
grapes, which hung to dry in the ceiling, and amused myself very
pleasantly with them till the horses had finished their meal and
it was lawful to set forwards.  We met with nothing but
rocky steeps shattered into fragments, and such roads as half
inclined us to repent our undertaking; but cold was not yet
amongst the number of our evils.

At last, after ascending a tedious while, we began to feel the
wind blow sharp from the peaks of the mountains, and to hear the
murmur of the forests of pine which shade their
acclivities.  A paved path leads across them, quite darkened
by boughs, which, meeting over our heads, cast a gloom and a
chill below, that would have stopped the proceedings of
reasonable mortals, and sent them to bask in the plain; but,
being not so easily discomfited, we threw ourselves boldly into
the forest.  It presented one of those confusions of tall
straight stems I am so fond of, and exhaled a fresh aromatic
odour that revived my spirits.

The cold to be sure was piercing; but setting that at
defiance, we galloped on, and issued shortly into a vast
amphitheatre of lawns and meadows, surrounded by thick woods
beautifully green.  Flocks of sheep were dispersed on the
slopes, whose smoothness and verdure equal our English
pastures.  Steep cliffs and mountains, clothed with beech to
their very summits, guard this retired valley.  The herbage,
moistened by streams which fall from the eminences, has never
been known to fade; and, whilst the chief part of Tuscany is
parched by the heats of summer, these upland meadows retain the
freshness of spring.  I regretted not having visited them
sooner, as autumn had already made great havoc amongst the
foliage.  Showers of leaves blew full in our faces as we
rode towards the convent, placed at an extremity of the vale, and
sheltered by remote firs and chestnuts towering one above
another.

Alighting before the entrance, two fathers came out and
received us into the peace of their retirement.  We found a
blazing fire, and tables spread very comfortably before it, round
which five or six overgrown friars were lounging, who seemed, by
the sleekness and rosy hue of their countenances, not totally to
have despised this mortal existence.

My letters of recommendation soon brought the heads of the
order about me, fair round figures, such as a Chinese would have
placed in his pagoda.  I could willingly have dispensed with
their attention; yet to avoid this was scarcely within the circle
of possibility.  All dinner we endured the silliest
questions imaginable; but that despatched, away flew your humble
servant to the fields and forests.  The fathers made a shift
to waddle after, as fast and as complaisantly as they were able,
but were soon distanced.

Now, I found myself at liberty, and ran up a narrow path
overhung by rock, with bushy chestnuts starting from the
crevices.  This led me into wild glens of beech trees,
mostly decayed and covered with moss: several were fallen.
It was amongst these the holy hermit Gualbertus had his
cell.  I rested a moment upon one of their huge branches,
listening to the roar of a waterfall which the wood concealed;
then springing up, I clambered over crags and fragments, guided
by the sound, and presently discovered a full stream,
precipitating itself down a cliff of pine, amongst which I
remained several minutes, watching the fallen floods; till, tired
with their endless succession, I plunged into the thickest of the
grove.  A beech received me, like a second Gualbertus, in
its hollow trunk.  The dry leaves chased each other down the
steeps on the edge of the torrents with hollow rustlings, whilst
the solemn wave of the forests above exactly answered the idea I
had formed of Valombrosa,

“ . . .
where th’ Etrurian shades

High overarch’t imbowr.”

The scene was beginning to take effect, and the genius of
Milton to move across his favourite valley, when the fathers
arrived puffing and blowing, by an easier ascent than I knew
of.  Pardon me, if I cursed their intrusion, and wished them
as still as Gualbertus.

“You have missed the way,” cried the youngest;
“the hermitage, with the fine picture by Andrea del Sarto,
which all the English admire, is on the opposite side of the
wood: there don’t you see it on the point of the
cliff?”

“Yes, yes,” said I a little peevishly; “I
wonder the devil has not pushed it down long ago; it seems to
invite his kick.”

“Satan,” answered the old Pagod very dryly,
“is full of malice; but whoever drinks of a spring which
the Lord causeth to flow near the hermitage is freed from his
illusions.”

“Are they so?” replied I with a sanctified accent;
“then prithee conduct me thither, for I have great need of
such salutary waters, being troubled with strange fancies and
imaginations, such as the evil one himself ought to be ashamed of
inspiring.”

The youngest father shook his head, as much as to say,
“This is nothing more than a heretic’s
whim.”

The senior—muddled, I conjecture—set forwards with
greater piety, and began some legendary tales of the kind which
my soul loveth: rare stories of caves and dens of the earth,
inhabited by ancient men familiar with spirits, and not the least
discomposed by a party of angels coming to dinner, or playing a
game at miracles to pass away the evening.  He pointed to a
chasm in the cliff, round which we were winding by a spiral path,
where Gualbertus used to sleep, and, turning himself towards the
west, see a long succession of saints and martyrs sweeping
athwart the sky, and gilding the clouds with far brighter
splendours than the setting sun.  Here he rested till his
last hour, when the bells of the convent beneath (which till that
moment would have made dogs howl, had there been any within its
precincts) struck out such harmonious jingling that all the
country around was ravished, and began lifting up their eyes with
singular devotion, when, behold! cherubim appeared, light dawned,
and birds chirped, although it was midnight.  Alas! alas!
what would I not give to witness such a spectacle, and read my
prayer-book by the effulgence of opening heaven!

However, willing to see something at least, I crept into the
consecrated cleft, and extended myself on its rugged
surface.  A very penitential couch! but commanding glorious
prospects of the world below, which lay this evening in deep blue
shade; the sun looking red and angry through misty vapours, which
prevented our discovering the Tuscan sea.

Finding the rock as damp as might be expected, I soon shifted
my quarters, and followed the youngest father up to the
Romitorio, a snug little hermitage, with a neat chapel, and
altar-piece by Andrea del Sarto, which I should have more
minutely examined in any other place, but where the wild scenery
of hanging woods and meadows, steep hills and nodding precipices,
possessed my whole attention.  I just stayed to taste the
holy fountain; and then, escaping from my conductors, ran eagerly
down the path, leaping over the springs that crossed it, and
entered a lawn of the smoothest turf, grazed by sheep, and
swelling into gentle acclivities, skirted by groves of fir, whose
solemn verdure formed a contrast with its tender green.
Beyond this pleasant opening rises a second, hemmed in with
copses; and still higher, a third, whence a forest of young pines
spires up into a lofty theatre terminated by peaks, universally
concealed under a thick mantle of beech, tinged with ruddy
brown.  Pausing in the midst of the lawns, and looking
upward to the sweeps of wood which surrounded me, I addressed my
orisons to the genius of the place, and prayed that I might once
more return into its bosom, and be permitted to bring you along
with me, for surely such meads, such groves, were formed for our
enjoyment!

This little rite performed, I walked on quite to the extremity
of the pastures, traversed a thicket, and found myself on the
edge of precipices, beneath whose base the whole Val d’Arno
lies expanded.  I listened to distant murmurings in the
plain, saw smoke rise from the cottages, and viewed a vast tract
of barren country, which evening rendered still more desolate,
bounded by the high mountain of Radicofani.  Then, turning
round, I beheld the whole extent of rock and forest, the groves
of beech, and wilds above the convent, glowing with fiery red,
for the sun, making a last effort to pierce the vapours, produced
this effect; which was the more striking, as the sky was dark,
and the rest of the prospect of a melancholy blue.

Returning slowly homeward, I marked the warm glow deserting
the eminences, and heard the bell toll sullenly to vespers.
The young boys of the seminary were moving in a body to their
dark inclosure, all dressed in black.  Many of them looked
pale and wan.  I wished to ask them whether the solitude of
Valombrosa suited their age and vivacity; but a tall spectre of a
priest drove them along like a herd, and presently, the gates
opening, I saw them no more.  A sadness I could scarcely
account for came over me.  I shivered at the bare idea of
being cooped up in such a place, and seeing no other living
objects than scarecrow priests and friars; to hear every day the
same dull service and droning organ; view the same cloisters; be
led the same walks; watched, cribbed, confined, and filled with
superstitious fears.

The night was growing chill, the winds boisterous, and in the
intervals of the gusts I had the addition of a lamentable
screech-owl to raise my spirits.  Upon the whole, I was not
at all concerned to meet the fathers, who came out to show me to
my room, and entertain me with various gossipings, both sacred
and profane, till supper appeared.

Next morning, the Padre Decano gave us chocolate in his
apartment; and afterwards led us round the convent, insisting
most unmercifully upon our viewing every cell and every
dormitory.  However, I was determined to make a full stop at
the organ, which is perhaps the most harmonious I ever played
upon; but placed in a dark, dingy recess, feebly lighted by
lamps, not calculated to inspire triumphant voluntaries.
The monks, who had all crowded around me when I first began, in
expectation of brisk jigs and lively overtures, soon took
themselves away upon hearing a strain ten times more sorrowful
than that to which they were accustomed.  I did not lament
their departure, but played dismally on till our horses came
round to the gate.  We mounted, spurred back through the
grove of pines which protect Valombrosa from intrusion, descended
the steeps, and, gaining the plains, galloped in three hours to
Florence.

LETTER XX.

Sienna
,

October
26
th
.

At last fears were overcome, the epidemical fever at Rome
allowed to be no longer dangerous, and myself permitted to quit
Florence.  The weather was neither gay nor dismal; the
country neither fine nor ugly; and your friend full as
indifferent as the scenes he looked at.  Towards afternoon,
a thunderstorm gave character to the landscape, and we entered a
narrow vale enclosed by rocks, with streams running at their
base.  Poplars with faded yellow leaves sprung from the
margins of the rivulets, which seemed to lose themselves in the
ruins of a castle, built in the Gothic times.  Our road led
through its court and passed the ancient keep, still darkened by
its turrets; a few mud cottages are scattered about the opening
where formerly the chieftain exercised his vassals, and trained
them to war.  The dungeon, once filled with miserable
victims, serves only at present to confine a few goats, which
were milking before its entrance.  As we were driven along
under a tottering gateway, and then through a plain and up a
hill, the breeze whispering amongst the fern which covers it, I
felt the sober autumnal cast of the evening bring back the happy
hours I passed last year at this very time, calm and
sequestered.  Full of these recollections, my eyes closed of
their own accord, and were not opened for many hours; in short,
till we entered Sienna.

October
27
th
.—Here my duty of course was
to see the cathedral, and I got up much earlier than I wished, in
order to perform it.  I wonder our holy ancestors did not
choose a mountain at once, scrape it into shrines, and chisel it
into scripture stories.  It would have cost them almost as
little trouble as the building in question, which may certainly
be esteemed a masterpiece of ridiculous taste and elaborate
absurdity.  The front, incrusted with alabaster, is worked
into a million of fretted arches and puzzling ornaments.
There are statues without number and relievos without end.

The church within is all of black and white marble
alternately; the roof blue and gold, with a profusion of silken
banners hanging from it; and a cornice running above the
principal arcade, composed entirely of bustos representing the
whole series of sovereign pontiffs, from the first Bishop of Rome
to Adrian the Fourth.  Pope Joan figured amongst them,
between Leo the Fourth and Benedict the Third, till the year
1600, when she was turned out, at the instance of Clement the
Eighth, to make room for Zacharias the First.

I hardly knew which was the nave, or which the cross aisle, of
this singular edifice, so perfect is the confusion of its
parts.  The pavement demands attention, being inlaid so
curiously as to represent variety of histories taken from Holy
Writ, and designed in the true style of that hobgoblin tapestry
which used to bestare the halls of our ancestors.  Near the
high altar stands the strangest of pulpits, supported by polished
pillars of granite, rising from lions’ backs, which serve
as pedestals.  In every corner of the place some chapel or
other offends or astonishes you.  That, however, of the
Chigi family, it must be allowed, has infinite merit with respect
to design and execution; but it is so lost in general disorder as
to want the best part of its effect.

From the church one enters a vaulted chamber, erected by the
Picolominis, filled with valuable missals most exquisitely
illuminated.  The paintings in fresco on the walls are
rather barbarous, though executed after the designs of the mighty
Raffaelle; but then, we must remember, he had but just escaped
from Pietro Perugino.

Not staying long in the Duomo, we left Sienna in good time;
and, after being shaken and tumbled in the worst roads that were
ever pretended to be made use of, found ourselves beneath the
rough mountains round Radicofani, about seven o’clock on a
cold and dismal evening.  Up we toiled a steep craggy
ascent, and reached at length the inn upon its summit.  My
heart sunk when I entered a vast range of apartments, with high
black rafted roofs, once intended for a hunting palace of the
Grand Dukes, but now desolate and forlorn.  The wind having
risen, every door began to shake, and every board substituted for
a window to clatter, as if the severe power who dwells on the
topmost peak of Radicofani, according to its village
mythologists, was about to visit his abode.  My only spell
to keep him at a distance was kindling an enormous fire, whose
charitable gleams cheered my spirits, and gave them a quicker
flow.  Yet, for some minutes, I never ceased looking, now to
the right, now to the left, up at the dark beams, and down the
long passages, where the pavement, broken up in several places,
and earth newly strewn about, seemed to indicate that something
horrid was concealed below.

A grim fraternity of cats kept whisking backwards and forwards
in these dreary avenues, which I am apt to imagine is the very
identical scene of a sabbath of witches at certain periods.
Not venturing to explore them, I fastened my door, pitched my bed
opposite the hearth, which glowed with embers, and crept under
the coverlids, hardly venturing to go to sleep, lest I should be
suddenly roused from it by the sudden glare of torches, and be
more initiated than I wished into the mysteries of the place.

Scarce was I settled, before two or three of the brotherhood
just mentioned stalked in at a little opening under the
door.  I insisted upon their moving off faster than they had
entered, suspecting that they would soon turn wizards, and was
surprised, when midnight came, to hear nothing more than their
mewings, doleful enough, and echoed by the hollow walls and
arches.

LETTER XXI.

Radicofani
,
October
28
th
.

I begin to despair of magical adventures, since none happened
at Radicofani, which Nature seems wholly to have abandoned.
Not a tree, not an acre of soil, has she bestowed upon its
inhabitants, who would have more excuse for practising the gloomy
art than the rest of mankind.  I was very glad to leave
their black hills and stony wilderness behind, and, entering the
Papal territory, to see some shrubs and corn-fields at a
distance, near Aquapadente, which is situated on a ledge of
cliffs, mantled with chestnut copses and tufted ilex.  The
country grew varied and picturesque.  St. Lorenzo, the next
post, built upon a hill, overlooks the lake of Bolsena, whose
woody shores conceal many ruined buildings.  We passed some
of them in a retired vale, with arches from rock to rock, and
grottos beneath half lost in thickets, from which rise craggy
pinnacles crowned by mouldering towers; just such scenery as
Polemburg and Peter de Laer introduce in their paintings.

Beyond these truly Italian prospects, which a mellow evening
tint rendered still more interesting, a forest of oaks presents
itself upon the brows of hills, which extends almost the whole
way to Monte Fiascone.  It was late before we ascended
it.  The whole country seems full of inhabited caverns, that
began as night drew on to shine with fires.  We saw many
dark shapes glancing before them, and perhaps a subterraneous
people like the Cimmerians lurk in their recesses.  As we
drew near Viterbo, the lights in the fields grew less and less
frequent; and when we entered the town, all was total
darkness.

To-morrow I hope to pay my vows before the high altar of St.
Peter, and tread the Vatican.  Why are you not here to usher
me into the imperial city: to watch my first glance of the
Coliseo: and lead me up the stairs of the Capitol?  I shall
rise before the sun, that I may see him set from Monte
Cavallo.

LETTER XXII.

Rome
,

October
29
th
.

We set out in the dark.  Morning dawned over the Lago di
Vico; its waters of a deep ultramarine blue, and its surrounding
forests catching the rays of the rising sun.  It was in vain
I looked for the cupola of St. Peter’s upon descending the
mountains beyond Viterbo.  Nothing but a sea of vapours was
visible.

At length they rolled away, and the spacious plains began to
show themselves, in which the most warlike of nations reared
their seat of empire.  On the left, afar off, rises the
rugged chain of Apennines, and on the other side, a shining
expanse of ocean terminates the view.  It was upon this vast
surface so many illustrious actions were performed, and I know
not where a mighty people could have chosen a grander
theatre.  Here was space for the march of armies, and verge
enough for encampments.  Levels for martial games, and room
for that variety of roads and causeways that led from the capital
to Ostia.  How many triumphant legions have trodden these
pavements! how many captive kings!  What throngs of cars and
chariots once glittered on their surface! savage animals dragged
from the interior of Africa; and the ambassadors of Indian
princes, followed by their exotic train, hastening to implore the
favour of the senate!

During many ages, this eminence commanded almost every day
such illustrious scenes; but all are vanished: the splendid
tumult is passed away; silence and desolation remain.
Dreary flats thinly scattered over with ilex, and barren hillocks
crowned by solitary towers, were the only objects we perceived
for several miles.  Now and then we passed a few black
ill-favoured sheep feeding by the way-side, near a ruined
sepulchre, just such animals as an ancient would have sacrificed
to the Manes.  Sometimes we crossed a brook, whose ripplings
were the only sounds which broke the general stillness, and
observed the shepherds’ huts on its banks, propped up with
broken pedestals and marble friezes.  I entered one of them,
whose owner was abroad tending his herds, and began writing upon
the sand, and murmuring a melancholy song.  Perhaps the dead
listened to me from their narrow cells.  The living I can
answer for: they were far enough removed.

You will not be surprised at the dark tone of my musings in so
sad a scene, especially as the weather lowered; and you are well
acquainted how greatly I depend upon skies and sunshine.
To-day I had no blue firmament to revive my spirits; no genial
gales, no aromatic plants to irritate my nerves and give me at
least a momentary animation.  Heath and furze were the sole
vegetation which covers this endless wilderness.  Every
slope is strewed with the relics of a happier period; trunks of
trees, shattered columns, cedar beams, helmets of bronze, skulls
and coins, are frequently dug up together.

I cannot boast of having made any discoveries, nor of sending
you any novel intelligence.  You knew before how perfectly
the environs of Rome were desolate, and how completely the Papal
government contrives to make its subjects miserable.  But
who knows that they were not just as wretched in those boasted
times we are so fond of celebrating?  All is doubt and
conjecture in this frail existence; and I might as well attempt
proving to whom belonged the mouldering bones which lay dispersed
around me, as venture to affirm that one age is more fortunate
than another.  Very likely the poor cottager, under whose
roof I reposed, is happier than the luxurious Roman upon the
remains of whose palace, perhaps, his shed is raised: and yet
that Roman flourished in the purple days of the empire, when all
was wealth and splendour, triumph and exultation.

I could have spent the whole day by the rivulet, lost in
dreams and meditations; but recollecting my vow, I ran back to
the carriage and drove on.  The road not having been mended,
I believe, since the days of the Cæsars, would not allow
our motions to be very precipitate.  “When you gain
the summit of yonder hill, you will discover Rome,” said
one of the postillions: up we dragged; no city appeared.
“From the next,” cried out a second; and so on from
height to height did they amuse my expectations.  I thought
Rome fled before us, such was my impatience, till at last we
perceived a cluster of hills with green pastures on their
summits, inclosed by thickets and shaded by flourishing
ilex.  Here and there a white house, built in the antique
style, with open porticos, that received a faint gleam of the
evening sun, just emerged from the clouds and tinting the meads
below.  Now domes and towers began to discover themselves in
the valley, and St. Peter’s to rise above the magnificent
roofs of the Vatican.  Every step we advanced the scene
extended, till, winding suddenly round the hill, all Rome opened
to our view.

A spring flowed opportunely into a marble cistern close by the
way; two cypresses and a pine waved over it.  I leaped up,
poured water upon my hands, and then, lifting them up to the
sylvan Genii of the place, implored their protection.  I
wished to have run wild in the fresh fields and copses above the
Vatican, there to have remained till fauns might creep out of
their concealment, and satyrs begin to touch their flutes in the
twilight, for the place looks still so wondrous classical, that I
can never persuade myself either Constantine Attila or the Popes
themselves have chased them all away.  I think I should have
found some out, who would have fed me with milk and chestnuts,
have sung me a Latian ditty, and mourned the woeful changes which
have taken place, since their sacred groves were felled, and
Faunus ceased to be oracular.  Who can tell but they would
have given me some mystic skin to sleep on, that I might have
looked into futurity?

Shall I ever forget the sensations I experienced upon slowly
descending the hills, and crossing the bridge over the Tiber;
when I entered an avenue between terraces and ornamented gates of
villas, which leads to the Porto del Popolo, and beheld the
square, the domes, the obelisk, the long perspective of streets
and palaces opening beyond, all glowing with the vivid red of
sunset?  You can imagine how I enjoyed my beloved tint, my
favourite hour, surrounded by such objects.  You can fancy
me ascending Monte Cavallo, leaning against the pedestal which
supports Bucephalus; then, spite of time and distance, hurrying
to St. Peter’s in performance of my vow.

I met the Holy Father in all his pomp returning from vespers:
trumpets flourishing, and a legion of guards drawn out upon Ponte
St. Angelo.  Casting a respectful glance upon the Moles
Adriani, I moved on till the full sweep of St. Peter’s
colonnade opened upon me, and fixed me, as if spell-bound, under
the obelisk, lost in wonder.  The edifice appears to have
been raised within the year, such is its freshness and
preservation.  I could hardly take my eyes from off the
beautiful symmetry of its front, contrasted with the magnificent
though irregular courts of the Vatican towering over the
colonnade, till, the sun sinking behind the dome, I ran up the
steps and entered the grand portal, which was on the very point
of being closed.

I knew not where I was, or to what scene transported.  A
sacred twilight concealing the extremities of the structure, I
could not distinguish any particular ornament, but enjoyed the
effect of the whole.  No damp air or fetid exhalation
offended me.  The perfume of incense was not yet entirely
dissipated.  No human being stirred.  I heard a door
close with the sound of thunder, and thought I distinguished some
faint whisperings, but am ignorant whence they came.
Several hundred lamps twinkled round the high altar, quite lost
in the immensity of the pile.  No other light disturbed my
reveries but the dying glow still visible through the western
windows.  Imagine how I felt upon finding myself alone in
this vast temple at so late an hour, and think whether I had not
revelations.

It was almost eight o’clock before I issued forth, and,
pausing a few minutes under the porticos, listened to the rush of
the fountains: then traversing half the town, I believe, in my
way to the Villa Medici, under which I am lodged, fell into a
profound repose, which my zeal and exercise may be allowed, I
think, to have merited.

October
30
th
.—It was a clear morning; I
mounted up to the roof of the house, and sat under a set of open
pavilions, surveying the vast group of stately buildings below;
then repaired immediately after breakfast to St. Peter’s,
which even exceeded the height of my expectations.  I could
hardly quit it.  I wish his Holiness would allow me to erect
a little tabernacle under the dome.  I should desire no
other prospect during the winter; no other sky than the vast
arches glowing with golden ornaments, so lofty as to lose all
glitter or gaudiness.  But I cannot say I should be
perfectly contented, unless I could obtain another pavilion for
you.  Thus established, we would take our evening walks on
the field of marble; for is not the pavement vast enough to
excuse the extravagance of the appellation?  Sometimes,
instead of climbing a mountain, we should ascend the cupola, and
look down on our little encampment below.  At night I should
wish for a constellation of lamps dispersed about in clusters,
and so contrived as to diffuse a mild and equal light for us to
read or draw by.  Music should not be wanting: one day to
breathe in the subterraneous chapels, another to mount high into
the dome.

The doors should be closed, and not a mortal admitted.
No priests, no cardinals: God forbid!  We should have all
the space to ourselves, and to such creatures, too, as resemble
us.

The windows I should shade with transparent curtains of yellow
silk, to admit the glow of perpetual summer.  Lanterns, as
many as you please, of all forms and sizes; they would remind us
of China, and, depending from the roof of the palace, bring
before us that of the Emperor Ki, which was twice as large as St.
Peter’s (if we may credit the grand annals), and lighted
alone by tapers, for his Imperial Majesty, being tired of the
sun, would absolutely have a new firmament of his own creation,
and an artificial day.  Was it not a rare fantastic
idea?  For my part, I should like of all things to immure
myself after his example, with those I love; forget the divisions
of time, have a moon at command, and a theatrical sun to rise and
set at pleasure.

I was so absorbed in my imaginary palace, and exhausted with
contriving plans for its embellishment, as to have no spirits
left for the Pantheon, which I visited late in the evening, and
entered with a reverence approaching to superstition.  The
whiteness of the dome offending me, I slunk into one of the
recesses, closed my eyes, transported myself into antiquity; then
opened them again, tried to persuade myself the pagan gods were
in their niches, and the saints out of the question; was vexed at
coming to my senses, and finding them all there, St. Andrew with
his cross, and St. Agnes with her lamb, etc., etc.  Then I
paced disconsolately into the portico, which shows the name of
Agrippa on its pediment.  I leaned a minute against a
Corinthian column; I lamented that no pontiff arrived with
victims and aruspices, of whom I might inquire, what, in the name
of birds and garbage, put me so terribly out of humour! for you
must know I was very near being disappointed, and began to think
Piranesi and Paolo Panini had been a great deal too colossal in
their view of this venerable structure.  I left the column,
walked to the centre of the temple, and, folding my arms, stood
as fixed as a statue.  Some architects have celebrated the
effect of light from the opening above, and pretended it to be
distributed around so as to give those who walk beneath the
appearance of mystic substances beaming with radiance.
Mighty fine, if that were the case!  I appeared, to be sure,
a luminous figure, and never stood I more in need of something to
distinguish me, being forlorn and dismal in the supreme
degree.

But though it is not so immense as I had expected, yet a
certain venerable air, an awful gloom, breathed inspiration,
though of the sorrowful kind.

I had expected a heap of Venetian letters, but could not
discover one.  I had received no intelligence from England
this many a tedious day; and for aught I can tell to the
contrary, you may have been dead these three weeks.  I think
I shall wander soon in the Catacombs, which I am half inclined to
imagine communicate with the lower world; and perhaps I may find
some letter there from you, lying upon a broken sarcophagus,
dated from the realms of Night, and giving an account of your
descent into her bosom.  Yet, I pray continually,
notwithstanding my curiosity to learn what passes in the dark
regions beyond the tomb, that you will condescend to remain a few
years longer on our planet; for what would become of me, should I
lose sight of you for ever?  Stay, therefore, as long as you
can, and let us have the delight of dozing a little more of this
poor existence away together, and steeping ourselves in pleasant
dreams.

October
31
st
.—I absolutely will have no
antiquary to go prating from fragment to fragment, and tell me,
that were I to stay five years at Rome, I should not see half it
contained.  The thought alone, of so much to look at, is
quite distracting, and makes me resolve to view nothing at all in
a scientific way; but straggle and wander about, just as the
spirit chooses.  This evening, it led me to the Coliseo, and
excited a vehement desire in me to break down and pulverize the
whole circle of saints’ nests and chapels, which disgrace
the arena.  You recollect, I dare say, the vile effect of
this holy trumpery, and would join with all your heart in kicking
it into the Tiber.  A few lazy abbots were at their
devotions before them; such as would have made a lion’s
mouth water; fatter, I dare say, than any saint in the whole
martyrology, and ten times more tantalizing.  I looked
first, at the dens where wild beasts used to be kept, to divert
the magnanimous people of Rome with devastation and murder; then,
at the tame cattle before the altars.  Heavens! thought I to
myself, how times are changed!  Could ever Vespasian have
imagined his amphitheatre would have been thus inhabited?  I
passed on, making these reflections, to a dark arcade, overgrown
with ilex.  In the openings which time and violence have
made, a distant grove of cypresses discover themselves; springing
from heaps of mouldering ruins, relieved by a clear transparent
sky, strewed with a few red clouds.  This was the sort of
prospect I desired, and I sat down on a shattered frieze to enjoy
it.  Many stories of ancient Rome thronged into my mind as I
mused; triumphal scenes, but tempered by sadness, and the awful
thoughts of their being all passed away.  It would be in
vain to recapitulate the ideas which chased one another
along.  Think where I sat, and you may easily conjecture the
series.  When the procession was fleeted by (for I not only
thought, but seemed to see warriors moving amongst the cypresses,
and consuls returning from Parthian expeditions, loaded with
strange spoils, and received with the acclamations of millions
upon entering the theatre), I arose, crossed the arena, paced
several times round and round, looked up to arcade rising above
arcade, and admiring the stately height and masses of the
structure, considered it in various points of view, and felt, as
if I never should be satisfied with gazing, hour after hour, and
day after day.  Next, directing my steps to the arch of
Constantine, I surveyed the groups of ruins which surrounded
me.  The cool breeze of the evening played in the beds of
canes and osiers which flourished under the walls of the Coliseo:
a cloud of birds were upon the wing to regain their haunts in its
crevices; and, except the sound of their flight, all was silent;
for happily no carriages were rattling along.  I observed
the palace and obelisk of St. John of Lateran, at a distance; but
it was too late to take a nearer survey; so, returning leisurely
home, I traversed the Campo Vaccino, and leaned a moment against
one of the columns which supported the temple of Jupiter
Stator.  Some women were fetching water from the fountain
hard by, whilst another group had kindled a fire under the shrubs
and twisted fig-trees, which cover the Palatine Hill.
Innumerable vaults and arches peep out of the vegetation.
It was upon these, in all probability, the splendid palace of the
Cæsars was raised.  Confused fragments of marble, and
walls of lofty terraces, are the sole traces of its ancient
magnificence.  A wretched rabble were roasting their
chestnuts, on the very spot, perhaps, where Domitian convened a
senate, to harangue upon the delicacies of his
entertainment.  The light of the flame cast upon the figures
around it, and the mixture of tottering wall with foliage
impending above their heads, formed a striking picture, which I
stayed contemplating from my pillar, till the fire went out, the
assembly dispersed, and none remained but a withered hag, raking
the embers, and muttering to herself.  I thought also it was
high time to retire, lest the unwholesome mists, which were
streaming from the opening before the Coliseo, might make me
repent my stay.  Whether they had already taken effect, or
no, I will not absolutely determine; but something or other had
grievously disordered me.  A few centuries ago I should have
taxed the old hag with my headache, and have attributed the
uncommon oppression I experienced to her baleful power.
Hastening to my hotel, I mounted into the open portico upon its
summit, nearly upon a level with the Villa Medici, and sat,
several hours, with my arms folded in one another, listening to
the distant rumours of the town.  It had been a fine moment
to have bestrode one of the winds which piped around me,
offering, no doubt, some compact from Lucifer.

November
1
st
.—Though you find I am not yet
snatched away from the earth, according to my last night’s
bodings, I was far too restless and dispirited to deliver my
recommendatory letters.  St. Carlos, a mighty day of gala at
Naples, was an excellent excuse for leaving Rome, and indulging
my roving disposition.  After spending my morning at St.
Peter’s, we set off about four o’clock, and drove by
the Coliseo and a Capuchin convent, whose monks were all busied
in preparing the skeletons of their order, to figure by
torchlight in the evening.  St. John’s of Lateran
astonished me.  I could not help walking several times round
the obelisk, and admiring the noble open space in which the
palace is erected, and the extensive scene of towers and
aqueducts discovered from the platform in front.

We went out at the Porta Appia, and began to perceive the
plains which surround the city opening on every side.  Long
reaches of walls and arches, but seldom interrupted, stretch
across them.  Sometimes, indeed, a withered pine, lifting
itself up to the mercy of every blast that sweeps the champagne,
breaks their uniformity.  Between the aqueducts to the left,
nothing but wastes of fern, or tracts of ploughed lands, dark and
desolate, are visible, the corn not being yet sprung up.  On
the right, several groups of ruined fanes and sepulchres
diversify the levels, with here and there a garden or woody
inclosure.  Such objects are scattered over the landscape,
that towards the horizon bulges into gentle ascents, and, rising
by degrees, swells at length into a chain of mountains, which
received the pale gleams of the sun, setting in watery
clouds.

By this uncertain light we discovered the white buildings of
Albano, sprinkled about the steeps.  We had not many moments
to contemplate them, for it was night when we passed the Torre di
mezza via, and began breathing a close pestilential vapour.
Half suffocated, and recollecting a variety of terrifying tales
about the malaria, we advanced, not without fear, to Veletri, and
hardly ventured to fall asleep when arrived there.

November
2
nd
.—I arose at daybreak, and
forgetting fevers and mortalities, ran into a level meadow
without the town, whilst the horses were putting to the
carriage.  Why should I calumniate the air? it seemed purer
and more transparent than any I had before inhaled.  The
mountains were covered with thin mists, and the morning star
sparkled above their summits.  Birds were twittering amongst
some sheds and bushes, which border the sides of the road.
A chestnut hung over it, against which I leaned till the chaise
came up.  Being perfectly alone, and not discovering any
trace of the neighbouring city, I fancied myself existing in the
ancient days of Hesperia, and hoped to meet Picus in his woods
before the evening.  But, instead of those shrill clamours
which used to echo through the thickets when Pan joined with
mortals in the chase, I heard the rumbling of our carriage, and
the curses of its postillions.  Mounting a horse, I flew
before them, and seemed to catch inspiration from the
breezes.  Now I turned my eyes to the ridge of precipices,
in whose grots and caverns Saturn and his people passed their
life; then to the distant ocean.  Afar off rose the cliffs,
so famous for Circe’s incantations, and the whole line of
coast, which was once covered with her forests.

Whilst I was advancing with full speed, the sunbeams began to
shoot athwart the mountains, the plains to light up by degrees,
and their shrubberies of myrtle to glisten with dewdrops.
The sea brightened, and the Circean rock soon glowed with
purple.  I never felt my spirits so exhilarated, and they
could not have flowed with more vivacity, even had I tasted the
cup which Helen gave Telemachus.  You will think me gone
wild when I tell you I was, in a manner, drunk with the dews of
the morning, and so enraptured with the prospects which lay
before me as to address them in verse, and compose charms to
dispel the enchantments of Circe.  All day were we
approaching her rock; towards evening Terracina appeared before
us, in a bold romantic site; house above house, and turret
looking over turret, on the steeps of a mountain, inclosed with
mouldering walls, and crowned by the ruined terraces of a
delightful palace: one of those, perhaps, which the luxurious
Romans inhabited during the summer, when so free and lofty an
exposition (the sea below, with its gales and murmurs) must have
been exquisitely agreeable.  Groves of orange and citron
hang on the declivity, rough with the Indian fig, whose bright
red flowers, illuminated by the sun, had a magic splendour.
A palm-tree, growing on the highest crag, adds not a little to
its singular appearance.  Being the largest I had ever seen,
and clustered with fruit, I climbed up the rocks to take a close
survey of it, and found a spring trickling near its fount,
bordered by fresh herbage.  On this I stretched myself on
the very edge of the precipice, and looking down upon the beach,
and glassy plains of ocean, exclaimed with Martial:

“O nemua!  O fentes! solidumque
madentis arenæ

Littus, et æquoreis splendidus Anxur aquis!”

Glancing my eyes athwart the sea, I fixed them on the Circean
promontory, which lies right opposite to Terracina, joined to the
continent by a very narrow strip of land, and appearing like an
island.  The roar of the waves lashing the base of the
precipices, might still be thought the howl of savage monsters;
but where are those woods which shaded the dome of the
goddess?  Scarce a tree appears.  A few thickets, and
but a few, are the sole remains of this once impenetrable
vegetation; yet even these I longed to visit, such was my
predilection for the spot.

Who knows but Circe might have led me to some other palace, in
a more secret and retired vale, where she dwells remote from
modern mariners, and the present inhabitants of her environs;
universally changed to swine for these many ages?  Their
metamorphoses being so thoroughly established as to leave no
further pretence for her operations, I can imagine her given up
to solitude, and the consciousness of her potent influence.
Notwithstanding the risks of the adventure, I wished to have
attempted it, and seen whether she would have allowed me, as
night came on, to warm myself by her cedar fire, and hear her
captivating song.  Perhaps, had the goddess been propitious,
I might have culled some herbs of wondrous efficacy.  You
recollect, I dare say, how renowned the cliff was for them, and
remember that Circe’s attendants, deeply skilled, like
their mistress, in pharmacy, were continually gathering plants in
the woods and wilds which enriched her abode.  It was thus
the companions of Ulysses found them employed, when, entering her
palace, they unwarily drank the beverage she offered.  Ovid
has told this story in a masterly manner, and formed a lively
picture of the magic dome, with the occupations of its
inhabitants.  We see them judiciously arranging their
plants, whilst Circe directs and points out, with the nicest
discernment, the simple and compound virtues of every flower.

Descending the cliff, and pursuing our route to Mola along the
shore, by a grand road formed on the ruins of the Appian, we
drove under an enormous perpendicular rock, standing detached,
like a watch-tower, and cut into arsenals and magazines.
Day closed just as we got beyond it, and a new moon gleamed
faintly on the waters.  We saw fires afar off in the bay,
some twinkling on the coast, others upon the waves, and heard the
murmur of voices; for the night was still and solemn, like that
of Cajetas’s funeral.  I looked anxiously on a sea,
where the heroes of the Odyssey and Æneid had sailed in
search of fate and empire, then closed my eyes, and dreamed of
those illustrious wanderers.

Nine struck when we arrived at Mola di Cajeta.  The boats
were just coming in (whose lights we had seen out upon the main),
and brought such fish as Neptune, I dare say, would have grudged
Æneas and Ulysses.

November
3
rd
.—The morning was soft, but
hazy.  I walked in a grove of oranges, white with blossoms,
and at the same time glowing with fruit, some of which I obtained
leave to gather.  The spot sloped pleasantly towards the
sea, and here I amused myself with my agreeable occupation till
the horses were ready, then set off on the Appian, between hedges
of myrtle and aloes, catching fresh gales from the sea as I flew
along, and breathing the perfume of an aromatic vegetation, which
covers the fields on the shore.  We observed variety of
towns, with battlemented walls and ancient turrets, crowning the
pinnacles of rocky steeps, surrounded by wilds, and rude
uncultivated mountains.  The Liris, now Garigliano, winds
its peaceful course through wide extensive meadows, scattered
over with the remains of aqueducts, and waters the base of the
rocks I have just mentioned.  Such a prospect could not fail
of bringing Virgil’s panegyric of Italy full in my
mind:

“Tot congesta manu præruptis oppida
saxis

Fluminaque antiquos suhterlabentia muros.”

As soon as we arrived in sight of Capua, the sky darkened,
clouds covered the horizon, and presently poured down such
deluges of rain as floated the whole country.  The gloom was
general; Vesuvius disappeared just after we had the pleasure of
discovering it; lightning began to flash with dreadful rapidity,
and people to run frightened to their houses.  At four
o’clock darkness universally prevailed, except when a livid
glare of lightning presented momentary glimpses of the bay and
mountains.  We lighted torches, and forded several torrents
almost at the hazard of our lives.  The fields round Naples
were filled with herds, lowing most piteously, and yet not half
so much scared as their masters, who ran about cursing and
swearing like Indians during the eclipse of the moon.  I
knew Vesuvius had often put their courage to proof, but little
thought of an inundation occasioning such commotions.

For three hours the storm increased in violence, and instead
of entering Naples on a calm evening, and viewing its delightful
shores by moonlight—instead of finding the squares and
terraces thronged with people and animated by music, we advanced
with fear and terror through dark streets totally deserted, every
creature being shut up in their houses, and we heard nothing but
driving rain, rushing torrents, and the fall of fragments beaten
down by their violence.  Our inn, like every other
habitation, was in great disorder, and we waited a long while
before we could settle in our apartments with any comfort.
All night the waves roared round the rocky foundations of a
fortress beneath my windows, and the lightning played clear in my
eyes.  I could not sleep, and was full as disturbed as the
elements.

November
4
th
.—Peace was restored to nature
in the morning, but every mouth was full of the dreadful
accidents which had happened in the night.  The sky was
cloudless when I awoke, and such was the transparence of the
atmosphere that I could clearly discern the rocks, and even some
white buildings on the island of Caprea, though at the distance
of several miles.  A large window fronts my bed, and its
casements being thrown open, gives me a vast prospect of ocean,
uninterrupted except by the peaks of Caprea and the Cape of
Sorento.  I lay half an hour gazing on the smooth level
waters, and listening to the confused voices of the fishermen,
passing and repassing in light skiffs, which came and disappeared
in an instant.

Running to the balcony the moment my eyes were fairly open
(for till then I saw objects, I know not how, as one does in
dreams), I leaned over its rails, and viewed Vesuvius rising
distinct into the blue ether, with all that world of gardens and
casinos which are scattered about its base; then looked down into
the street, deep below, thronged with people in holiday garments,
and carriages, and soldiers in full parade.  The woody,
variegated shore of Posilipo next drew my attention.  It was
on those very rocks, under those tall pines, Sannazaro was wont
to sit by moonlight, or at peep of dawn, holding converse with
the Nereids.  ’Tis there he still sleeps; and I wished
to have gone immediately and strewed coral over his tomb, but I
was obliged to check my impatience, and hurry to the palace in
form and gala.

A courtly mob had got thither upon the same errand, daubed
over with lace and most notably be-periwigged.  Nothing
but—bows and salutations were going forward on the
staircase, one of the largest I ever beheld, and which a
multitude of prelates and friars were ascending in all the pomp
of awkwardness.  I jostled along to the presence chamber,
where his Majesty was dining alone in a circular inclosure of
fine clothes and smirking faces.  The moment he had
finished, twenty long necks were poked forth, and it was a
glorious struggle amongst some of the most decorated who first
should kiss his hand.  Doing so was the great business of
the day, and everybody pressed forward to the best of their
abilities.  His Majesty seemed to eye nothing but the end of
his nose, which is doubtless a capital object.

Though people have imagined him a weak monarch, I beg leave to
differ in opinion, since he has the boldness to prolong his
childhood and be happy, in spite of years and conviction.
Give him a boar to stab, and a pigeon to shoot at, a battledore
or an angling rod, and he is better contented than Solomon in all
his glory, and will never discover, like that sapient sovereign,
that all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

His courtiers in general have rather a barbaric appearance,
and differ little in the character of their physiognomies from
the most savage nations.  I should have taken them for
Calmucks or Samoieds, had it not been for their dresses and
European finery.

You may suppose I was not sorry, after my presentation was
over, to return to Sir W.’s and hear Lady H. play, whose
music breathes the most pastoral Sicilian ideas, and transports
me to green meads on the sea-coast, where I wander with
Theocritus.

The evening was passing swiftly away in this delightful
excursion of fancy, and I had almost forgotten there was a grand
illumination at the theatre of St. Carlo.  After traversing
a number of dark streets, we suddenly entered this enormous
edifice, whose six rows of boxes blazed with tapers.  I
never beheld such lofty walls of light, nor so pompous a
decoration as covered the stage.  Marchesi was singing in
the midst of all these splendours some of the poorest music
imaginable, with the clearest and most triumphant voice, perhaps,
in the universe.

It was some time before I could look to any purpose around me,
or discover what animals inhabited this glittering world: such
was its size and glare.  At last I perceived vast numbers of
ugly beings, in gold and silver raiment, peeping out of their
boxes.  The court being present, a tolerable silence was
maintained, but the moment his Majesty withdrew (which great
event took place at the beginning of the second act) every tongue
broke loose, and nothing but buzz and hubbub filled up the rest
of the entertainment.

The last ballet, formed upon the old story of “Le Festin
de Pierre,” had wonderful effect, and terminated in the
most striking perspective of the infernal region.  Picq
danced incomparably, and Signora Rossi led the Fandango, with a
grace and activity that pleased me beyond idea.  Music was
never more rapturous than that which accompanies this
dance.  It quite enchanted me, and I longed to have sprung
upon the stage.  The cadence is so strongly marked by the
castanets, that it is almost impossible to be out of time; and
the rapidity of steps and varied movements scarcely allows a
moment to think of being tired.  I should imagine the
eternal dance, with which certain tribes of American savages
think they are to be rewarded in a future existence, might be
formed somewhat on this model.  Indeed the Fandango arrived
in Spain with the conquerors of the other hemisphere, and is far
too lively and extatic to be of European original.

November
6
th
.—Till to-day we have had
nothing but rains; the sea covered with mists, and Caprea
invisible.  Would you believe it?  I have not yet been
able to mount to St. Elmo and the Capo di Monte, in order to take
a general view of the town.

At length a bright gleam of sunshine roused me from my
slumbers, and summoned me to the broad terrace of Chiaja,
directly above the waters and commanding the whole coast of
Posilipo.  Insensibly I drew towards it, and (you know the
pace I run when out upon discoveries) soon reached the entrance
of the grotto, which lay in dark shades, whilst the crags that
lower over it were brightly illumined.  Shrubs and vines
grow luxuriantly in the crevices of the rock; and their fresh
yellow colours, variegated with ivy, have a beautiful
effect.  To the right a grove of pines sprung from the
highest pinnacles: on the left, bay and chestnut conceal the tomb
of Virgil, placed on the summit of a cliff which impends over the
opening of the grotto, and is fringed with a florid
vegetation.  Beneath are several wide apertures hollowed in
the solid stone, which lead to caverns sixty or seventy feet in
depth, where a number of peasants, who were employed in
quarrying, made such a noise with their tools and their voices as
almost inclined me to wish the Cimmerians would start from their
subterraneous habitations, and sacrifice these profane to the
Manes.

Walking out of the sunshine, I seated myself on a loose stone
immediately beneath the first gloomy arch of the grotto, and
looking down the vast and solemn perspective, terminated by a
speck of grey uncertain light, venerated a work which some old
chroniclers have imagined as ancient as the Trojan war.
’Twas here the mysterious race I have just mentioned
performed their infernal rites, and it was this excavation
perhaps which led to their abode.

The Neapolitans attribute a more modern, though full as
problematical an origin to their famous cavern, and most piously
believe it to have been formed by the enchantments of Virgil,
who, as Mr. Addison very justly observes, is better known at
Naples in his magical character, than as the author of the
Æneid.  This strange infatuation most probably arose
from the vicinity of the tomb, in which his ashes are supposed to
have been deposited; and which, according to popular tradition,
was guarded by those very spirits who assisted in constructing
the cave.  But whatever may have given rise to these ideas,
certain it is they were not confined to the lower ranks
alone.  King Robert,
[240]
a wise though far
from poetical monarch, conducted his friend Petrarch with great
solemnity to the spot; and, pointing to the entrance of the
grotto, very gravely asked him, whether he did not adopt the
general belief, and conclude this stupendous passage derived its
origin from Virgil’s powerful incantations?  The
answer, I think, may easily be conjectured.

When I had sat for some time, contemplating this dusky avenue,
and trying to persuade myself that it was hewn by the Cimmerians,
I retreated without proceeding any farther, and followed a narrow
path which led me, after some windings and turnings, along the
brink of the precipice, across a vineyard, to that retired nook
of the rocks which shelters Virgil’s tomb, most venerably
mossed over, and more than half concealed by bushes and
vegetation.  Drops of dew were distilling from the niches of
the little chamber, which once contained his urn, and heaps of
withered leaves had gathered on the pavement.  Amongst these
I crept to eat some grapes and biscuits, having duly scattered a
few crumbs as a sort of offering to the invisible guardians of
the place.  I believe they were sensible of my piety, and,
as a reward, kept vagabonds and clowns away.

The one who conducted me remained aloof at awful distance,
whilst I sat commercing with the manes of my beloved poet, or
straggling about the shrubbery which hangs directly above the
mouth of the grot.  I wonder I did not visit the eternal
shades sooner that I expected, for no squirrel ever skipped from
bough to bough more venturously.  One instant I climbed up
the branches of a chestnut, and sat almost on its extremity, my
feet impending over the chasm below; another I boldly advanced to
the edge of the rock, and saw crowds of people and carriages,
diminished by distance, issuing from the bosom of the mountain,
and disappearing almost as soon as discovered in the windings of
its road.  Having clambered high above the cavern, I
hazarded my neck on the top of one of the pines, and looked
contemptuously down on the race of pigmies that were so busily
moving to and fro.  The sun was fiercer than I could have
wished, but the sea-breezes fanned me in my aërial
situation, which commanded the grand sweep of the bay, varied by
convents, palaces, and gardens, mixed with huge masses of rock
and crowned by the stately buildings of the Carthusians and
fortress of St. Elmo.  Add a glittering blue sea to this
perspective, with Caprea rising from its bosom, and Vesuvius
breathing forth a white column of smoke into the ether, and you
will then have a scene upon which I gazed with delight, for more
than an hour, almost forgetting that I was perched upon the head
of a pine, with nothing but a frail branch to uphold me.
However, I descended alive, as Virgil’s genii, I am
resolved to believe, were my protectors.

LETTER XXIII.

November
8
th
.—This morning I awoke in the
glow of sunshine; the air blew fresh and fragrant; never did I
feel more elastic and enlivened.  A brisker flow of spirits
than I had for many a day experienced, animated me with a desire
of rambling about the shore of Baii, and creeping into caverns
and subterraneous chambers.  Off I set along Chiaja, and up
strange paths which impend over the grotto of Posilipo, amongst
the thickets mentioned a letter or two ago; for in my present
lively humour, I disdained ordinary roads, and would take paths
and ways of my own.  A society of kids did not understand
what I meant by intruding upon their precipices; and scrambling
away, scattered sand and fragments upon the good people that were
trudging along the pavement below.

I went on from pine to pine, and thicket to thicket, upon the
brink of rapid declivities.  My conductor, a shrewd savage,
whom Sir William had recommended to me, cheered our route with
stories that had passed in the neighbourhood, and traditions
about the grot over which we were travelling.  I wish you
had been of the party, and sat down by us on little smooth spots
of sward, where I reclined, scarcely knowing which way caprice
was leading me.  My mind was full of the tales of the place,
and glowed with a vehement desire of exploring the world beyond
the grot.  I longed to ascend the promontory of Misenus, and
follow the same dusky route down which the Sibyl conducted
Æneas.

With these dispositions I proceeded; and soon the cliffs and
copses opened to views of the Baian bay, with the little isles of
Niscita and Lazaretto lifting themselves out of the waters.
Procita and Ischia appeared at a distance, invested with that
purple bloom so inexpressibly beautiful, and peculiar to this
fortunate climate.  I hailed the prospect and blessed the
transparent air that gave me life and vigour to run down the
rocks, and hie as fast as my savage across the plain to
Puzzoli.  There we took bark and rowed out into the blue
ocean, by the remains of a sturdy mole: many such, I imagine,
adorned the bay in Roman ages crowned by vast lengths of slender
pillars; pavilions at their extremities, and taper cypresses
spiring above their balustrades: this character of villa occurs
very frequently in the paintings of Herculaneum.

We had soon crossed the bay, and landing on a bushy coast,
near some fragments of a temple which they say was raised to
Hercules, advanced into the country by narrow tracks covered with
moss and strewed with shining pebbles; to the right and left,
broad masses of luxuriant foliage, chestnut, bay, and ilex, that
shelter the ruins of columbariums and sepulchral chambers, where
the dead sleep snug amongst rampant herbage.  The region was
still, save when a cock crew from the hamlets, which, as well as
the tombs, are almost concealed by thickets.  No parties of
smart Englishmen and connoisseurs were about.  I had all the
land to myself, and mounted its steeps and penetrated into its
recesses, with the importance of a discoverer.  What a
variety of narrow paths, between banks and shades, did I wildly
follow! my savage laughing loud at my odd gestures and useless
activity.  He wondered I did not scrape the ground for
medals, and pocket little bits of plaster, like other plausible
young travellers that had gone before me.

After ascending some time, I followed him into the Piscina
Mirabilis, the wondrous reservoir which Nero constructed to
supply his fleet, when anchored in the neighbouring bay.
’Tis a grand labyrinth of solid vaults and pillars, as you
well know, but you cannot conceive the partial gleams of sunshine
which played on the arches, nor the variety of roots and ivies
trailing from the cove.  A noise of trickling waters
prevailed, that had almost lulled me to sleep as I rested myself
on the celandine which carpets the floor; but curiosity urging me
forward, I gained the upper air; walked amongst woods a few
minutes, and then into grots and dismal excavations (prisons they
call them), which began to weary me.

After having gone up and down in this manner for some time, we
at last reached an eminence that looked over the Mare Morto, and
Elysian fields trembling with poplars.  The Dead Lake, a
faithful emblem of eternal tranquillity, looked deep and
solemn.  A few peasants were passing along its margin, their
shadows reflected on the water: all was serene and
peaceful.  Turning from the lake I espied a rock at about a
league distant, whose summit was clad with verdure, and finding
this to be the promontory of Misenus, I immediately set my face
to that quarter.

We passed several dirty villages, inhabited by an ill-favoured
generation, infamous for depredations and murders.  Their
gardens, however, discover some marks of industry; the fields are
separated by neat hedges of cane, and corn seemed to flourish in
the inclosures.

I walked on with slowness and deliberation, musing at every
step, and stopping ever and anon to rest myself by springs and
tufted bay-trees; when insensibly we began to leave the
cultivated lands behind us, and to lose ourselves in shady wilds,
which, to all appearance, no mortal had ever trodden.  Here
were no paths, no enclosures; a primeval rudeness characterized
the whole scene,—

“Juvat arva videre,

Non rastris, hominum non ulli obnoxia curæ.”

The idea of going almost out of the world, soothed the tone of
mind into which a variety of affecting recollections had thrown
me.  I formed conjectures about the promontory to which we
were tending; and when I cast my eyes around the savage
landscape, transported myself four thousand years into antiquity,
and half persuaded myself I was one of Æneas’s
companions.  After forcing our way about a mile through
glades of shrubs and briars, we entered a verdant opening at the
base of the cliff which takes its name from Misenus.  The
poets of the Augustan age would have celebrated such a meadow
with the warmest raptures; they would have discovered a nymph in
every flower, and detected a dryad under every tree.
Doubtless imagination never formed a lovelier prospect.
Here were clear streams and grassy hillocks, leafy shrubs and
cypresses spiring out of their bosom,—

“Et circum irriguo surgebant lilia prato

Candida purpureis mista papaveribus.”

But as it is not the lot of human animals to be contented,
instead of reposing in the vale, I scaled the rock, and was three
parts dissolved in attaining its summit,—a flat spot
covered with herbage, where I lay contemplating the ocean, and
fanned by its breezes.  The sun darted upon my head; I
wished to avoid its immediate influence: no tree was near.
Deep below lay the pleasant valley: ’twas a long way to
descend.  Looking round and round, I spied something like a
hut, under a crag on the edge of a dark fissure.  Might I
avail myself of its covert?  My conductor answered in the
affirmative, and added that it was inhabited by a good old woman,
who never refused a cup of milk, or slice of bread, to refresh a
weary traveller.

Thirst and fatigue urged me speedily down an intervening slope
of stunted myrtle.  Though oppressed with heat, I could not
help deviating a few steps from the direct path to notice the
uncouth rocks which rose frowning on every quarter.  Above
the hut, their appearance was truly formidable; dark ivy crept
among the crevices, and dwarf aloes with sharp spines, such as
Lucifer himself might be supposed to have sown.  Indeed, I
knew not whether I was not approaching some gate that leads to
his abode, as I drew near a gulph (the fissure lately mentioned)
and heard the hollow gusts which were imprisoned below.  The
savage, my guide, shuddered as he passed by to apprise the old
woman of my coming.  I felt strangely, and stared around me,
and but half liked my situation.  To say truth, I wished
myself away, and heartily regretted the green vale.

In the midst of my doubts, forth tottered the old woman.
“You are welcome,” said she, in a feeble voice, but a
better dialect than I had heard in the neighbourhood.  Her
look was more humane, and she seemed of a superior race to the
inhabitants of the surrounding valleys.  My savage treated
her with peculiar deference.  She had just given him some
bread, with which he retired to a respectful distance, bowing to
the earth.  I caught the mode, and was very obsequious,
thinking myself on the point of experiencing a witch’s
influence, and gaining, perhaps, some insight into the volume of
futurity.  She smiled at my agitation, and kept beckoning me
into the cottage.

“Now,” thought I to myself, “I am upon the
verge of an adventure.  O Quixote!  O Sylvio di
Rosalva! how would ye have strutted in such a situation!
What fair Infantas would ye not have expected to behold,
condemned to spinning wheels, and solitude?”  I, alas!
saw nothing but clay walls, a straw bed, some glazed earthen
bowls, and a wooden crucifix.  My shoes were loaded with
sand: this my hostess perceived, and immediately kindling a fire
in an inner part of the hovel, brought out some warm water to
refresh my feet, and set some milk and chestnuts before me.
This patriarchal politeness was by no means indifferent after my
tiresome ramble.  I sat down opposite to the door which
fronted the unfathomable gulph; beyond appeared the sea, of a
deep cerulean, foaming with waves.  The sky also was
darkening apace with storms.  Sadness came over me like a
cloud, and I looked up to the old woman for consolation.

“And you too are sorrowful, young stranger,” said
she, “that come from the gay world!  How must I feel,
who pass year after year in these lonely mountains?”
I answered that the weather affected me, and my spirits were
exhausted by the walk.

All the while I spoke she looked at me with such a melancholy
earnestness that I asked the cause, and began again to imagine
myself in some fatal habitation,

“Where more is
meant than meets the ear.”

Said she, “Your features are wonderfully like those of
an unfortunate young person, who, in this retirement . . .
”  The tears began to fall as she pronounced these
words; she seemed older than before, and bent to the ground with
sorrow.  My curiosity was fired.  “Tell
me,” continued I, “what you mean? who was this youth
for whom you are so interested? and why did he seclude himself in
this wild region?  Your kindness might no doubt alleviate,
in some measure, the horrors of the place; but may God defend me
from passing the night near such a gulph!  I would not trust
myself in a despairing moment.”

“It is,” said she, “a place of
horrors.  I tremble to relate what has happened on this very
spot; but your manner interests me, and though I am little given
to narrations, for once I will unlock my lips concerning the
secrets of yonder fatal chasm.

“I was born in a distant part of Italy, and have known
better days.  In my youth fortune smiled upon my family, but
in a few years they withered away; no matter by what
accident.  I am not going, however, to talk of myself.
Have patience a few moments!  A series of unfortunate events
reduced me to indigence, and drove me to this desert, where, from
rearing goats and making their milk into cheese, by a different
method than is common in the Neapolitan State, I have, for about
thirty years, prolonged a sorrowful existence.  My silent
grief and constant retirement had made me appear to some a saint,
and to others a sorceress.  The slight knowledge I have of
plants has been exaggerated, and, some years back, the hours I
gave up to prayer, and the recollection of former friends, lost
to me for ever! were cruelly intruded upon by the idle and the
ignorant.  But soon I sank into obscurity; my little recipes
were disregarded, and you are the first stranger who, for these
twelve months past, has visited my abode.  Ah, would to God
its solitude had ever remained inviolate!

“It is now three-and-twenty years,” and she looked
upon some characters cut on the planks of the cottage,
“since I was sitting by moonlight, under that cliff you
view to the right, my eyes fixed on the ocean, my mind lost in
the memory of my misfortunes, when I heard a step, and starting
up, a figure stood before me.  It was a young man, in a rich
habit, with streaming hair, and looks that bespoke the utmost
terror.  I knew not what to think of this sudden
apparition.  ‘Mother,’ said he with faltering
accents, ‘let me rest under your roof; and deliver me not
up to those who thirst after my blood.  Take this gold; take
all, all!’

“Surprise held me speechless; the purse fell to the
ground; the youth stared wildly on every side: I heard many
voices beyond the rocks; the wind bore them distinctly, but
presently they died away.  I took courage, and assured the
youth my cot should shelter him.  ‘Oh! thank you,
thank you!’ answered he, and pressed my hand.  He
shared my scanty provision.

“Overcome with toil (for I had worked hard in the day),
sleep closed my eyes for a short interval.  When I awoke the
moon was set, but I heard my unhappy guest sobbing in
darkness.  I disturbed him not.  Morning dawned, and he
was fallen into a slumber.  The tears bubbled out of his
closed eyelids, and coursed one another down his wan
cheeks.  I had been too wretched myself not to respect the
sorrows of another: neglecting therefore my accustomed
occupations, I drove away the flies that buzzed around his
temples.  His breast heaved high with sighs, and he cried
loudly in his sleep for mercy.

“The beams of the sun dispelling his dream, he started
up like one that had heard the voice of an avenging angel, and
hid his face with his hands.  I poured some milk down his
parched throat.  ‘Oh, mother!’ he exclaimed,
‘I am a wretch unworthy of compassion; the cause of
innumerable sufferings; a murderer! a parricide!’  My
blood curdled to hear a stripling utter such dreadful words, and
behold such agonising sighs swell in so young a bosom; for I
marked the sting of conscience urging him to disclose what I am
going to relate.

“It seems he was of high extraction, nursed in the pomps
and luxuries of Naples, the pride and darling of his parents,
adorned with a thousand lively talents, which the keenest
sensibility conspired to improve.  Unable to fix any bounds
to whatever became the object of his desires, he passed his first
years in roving from one extravagance to another, but as yet
there was no crime in his caprices.

“At length it pleased Heaven to visit his family, and
make their idol the slave of an unworthy passion.  He had a
friend, who from his birth had been devoted to his interest, and
placed all his confidence in him.  This friend loved to
distraction a young creature, the most graceful of her sex (as I
can witness), and she returned his affection.  In the
exultation of his heart, he showed her to the wretch whose tale I
am about to tell.  He sickened at her sight.  She too
caught fire at his glances.  They languished—they
consumed away—they conversed, and his persuasive language
finished what his guilty glances had begun.

“Their flame was soon discovered, for he disdained to
conceal a thought, however dishonourable.  The parents
warned the youth in the tenderest manner; but advice and prudent
counsels were to him so loathsome, that unable to contain his
rage, and infatuated with love, he menaced the life of his friend
as the obstacle of his enjoyment.  Coolness and moderation
were opposed to violence and frenzy, and he found himself treated
with a contemptuous gentleness.  Stricken to the heart, he
wandered about for some time like one entranced.  Meanwhile
the nuptials were preparing; and the lovely girl he had perverted
found ways to let him know she was about to be torn from his
embraces.

“He raved, and rousing his dire spirit, applied to a
malignant dæmon who sold the most inveterate poisons.
These he presented, like a cup of pure iced water, to his friend,
and to his own affectionate father.  They drank the draught,
and soon began to pine.  He marked the progress of their
dissolution with a horrid firmness.  He let the moment pass
beyond which all antidotes were vain.  His friend expired;
and the young criminal, though he beheld the dews of death hang
on his parent’s forehead, yet stretched not forth his
hand.  In a short space the miserable father breathed his
last, whilst his son was sitting aloof in the same chamber.

“The sight overcame him.  He felt, for the first
time, the pangs of remorse.  His agitation passed not
unnoticed.  He was watched: suspicions beginning to unfold,
he took alarm, and one evening escaped; but not without
previously informing the partner of his crimes which way he
intended to flee.  Several pursued; but the inscrutable will
of Providence blinded their search, and I was doomed to behold
the effects of celestial vengeance.

“Such are the chief circumstances of the tale I gathered
from the youth.  I swooned whilst he related it, and could
take no sustenance.  One whole day afterwards did I pray the
Lord, that I might die rather than be near an incarnate
demon.  With what indignation did I now survey that slender
form and those flowing tresses, which had interested me before so
much in his behalf!

“No sooner did he perceive the change in my countenance,
than sullenly retiring to yonder rock, he sat careless of the sun
and scorching winds; for it was now the summer solstice.
Equally was he heedless of the unwholesome dews.  When
midnight came my horrors were augmented; and I meditated several
times to abandon my hovel, and fly to the next village; but a
power more than human chained me to the spot and fortified my
mind.

“I slept, and it was late next morning when some one
called at the wicket of the little fold, where my goats are
penned.  I arose, and saw a peasant of my acquaintance
leading a female strangely muffled up, and casting her eyes on
the ground.  My heart misgave me.  I thought this was
the very maid who had been the cause of such unheard-of
wickedness.  Nor were my conjectures ill-founded.
Regardless of the clown who stood by in stupid astonishment, she
fell to the earth and bathed my hand with tears.  Her
trembling lips with difficulty inquired after the youth; and, as
she spoke, a glow of conscious guilt lightened up her pale
countenance.

“The full recollection of her lover’s crimes shot
through my memory.  I was incensed, and would have spurned
her away; but she clung to my garments and seemed to implore my
pity with a look so full of misery, that, relenting, I led her in
silence to the extremity of the cliff where the youth was seated,
his feet dangling above the sea.  His eye was rolling wildly
around, but it soon fixed upon the object for whose sake he had
doomed himself to perdition.

“I am not inclined to describe their ecstasies, or the
eagerness with which they sought each other’s
embraces.  I turned indignantly my head; and, driving my
goats to a recess amongst the rocks, sat revolving in my mind
these strange events.  I neglected procuring any provision
for my unwelcome guests; and about midnight returned homewards by
the light of the moon, which shone serenely in the heavens.
Almost the first object her beams discovered was the guilty maid
sustaining the head of her lover, who had fainted through
weakness and want of nourishment.  I fetched some dry bread,
and, dipping it in milk, laid it before them.  Having
performed this duty I set open the door of my hut, and retiring
to a neighbouring cavity, there stretched myself on a heap of
leaves, and offered my prayers to Heaven.

“A thousand fears, till this moment unknown, thronged
into my fancy.  I mistook the shadow of leaves, that
chequered the entrance to the grot, for ugly reptiles, and
repeatedly shook my garments.  The flow of the distant
surges was deepened by my apprehensions into distant groans: in a
word, I could not rest; but issuing from the cavern as hastily as
my trembling knees would allow, paced along the edge of the
precipice.  An unaccountable impulse hurried my steps.
Dark clouds were driving across the sky, and the setting moon was
flushed with the deepest crimson.  A wan gleam coloured the
sea.  Such was my terror and shivering, that, unable to
advance to my hut or retreat to the cavern, I was about to shield
myself from the night in a sandy crevice, when a loud shriek
pierced my ear.  My fears had confused me; I was in fact
hard by my hovel, and scarcely three paces from the brink of the
cavern: it was from thence the cries proceeded.

“Advancing in a cold shudder to its edge, part of which
was newly crumbled in, I discovered the form of the young man
suspended by one foot to a branch of juniper that grew ten feet
down: thus dreadfully did he hang over the gulph from the branch
bent with his weight.  His features were distorted, his
eye-balls glared with agony, and his screams became so shrill and
terrible, that I lost all power of assistance.  Fixed, I
stood with my eyes riveted upon the criminal, who incessantly
cried out, ‘O God!  O Father! save me, if there be yet
mercy! save me, or I sink into the abyss!’

“I am convinced he saw me not; for not once did he
implore my help.  My heart was dead within me.  I
called out upon the Lord.  His voice grew faint, and as I
gazed intent upon him, he fell into utter darkness.  I sank
to the earth in a trance, during which a sound like the rush of
pennons assaulted my ear: methought the evil spirit was bearing
off his soul; I lifted up my eyes, but nothing stirred; the
stillness that prevailed was awful.

“The moon looked stained with streaks of blood; her orb
hanging low over the waves afforded a sickly light, by which I
perceived some one coming down that white cliff you see before
you; and soon I heard the voice of the young woman calling aloud
on her guilty lover.  She stopped.  She repeated again
and again her exclamation; but there was no reply.  Alarmed
and frantic she hurried along the path, and now I saw her on the
promontory, and now by yonder pine, devouring with her glances
every crevice in the rock.  At length perceiving me, she
flew to where I stood, by the fatal precipice, and having noticed
the fragments fresh crumbled in, pored importunately on my
countenance.  I continued pointing to the chasm; she
trembled not; her tears could not flow; but she divined the
meaning.  ‘He is lost!’ said she; ‘the
earth has swallowed him! but, as I have shared with him the
highest joy, so will I partake his torments.  I will follow;
dare not to hinder me.’  I shrank back.

“Like the phantoms I have seen in dreams, she glanced
beside me; and, clasping her hands above her head, lifted a
steadfast look on the hemisphere, and viewed the moon with an
anxiousness that told me she was bidding it farewell for
ever.  Observing a silken handkerchief on the ground, with
which she had but an hour ago bound her lover’s temples,
she snatched it up, and imprinting it with burning kisses, thrust
it into her bosom.  Once more, expanding her arms in the
last act of despair and miserable passion, she threw herself,
with a furious leap, into the gulph.

“To its margin I crawled on my knees, and, shuddering,
looked down into the gloom.  There I remained in the most
dreadful darkness; for now the moon was sunk, the sky obscured
with storms, and a tempestuous blast ranging the ocean.
Showers poured thick upon me, and the lightning, in clear and
frequent flashes, gave me terrifying glimpses of yonder accursed
chasm.

“Stranger, dost thou believe in the great Being? in our
Redeemer? in the tenets of our faith?”  I answered
with reverence, but said I was no Catholic.
“Then,” continued the aged woman, “I will not
declare before a heretic what were the sacred visions of that
night of vengeance!”  She paused; I was silent.

After a short interval, with deep and frequent sighs, she
resumed her narrative.  “Daylight began to dawn as if
with difficulty, and it was late before its radiance had tinged
the watery and tempestuous clouds.  I was still kneeling by
the gulph in prayer when the cliffs began to brighten, and the
beams of the morning sun to strike against me.  Then did I
rejoice.  Then no longer did I think myself of all human
beings the most abject and miserable.  How different did I
feel myself from those, fresh plunged into the abodes of torment,
and driven for ever from the morning!

“Three days elapsed in total solitude: on the fourth,
some grave and ancient persons arrived from Naples, who
questioned me, repeatedly, about the wretched lovers, and to whom
I related their fate with every dreadful particular.  Soon
after I learned that all discourse concerning them was expressly
stopped, and that no prayers were offered up for their
souls.”

With these words, as well as I recollect, the old woman ended
her singular narration.  My blood thrilled as I walked by
the gulph to call my guide, who stood aloof under the
cliffs.  He seemed to think, from the paleness of my
countenance, that I had heard some gloomy prediction, and shook
his head when I turned round to bid my old hostess adieu!
It was a melancholy evening, and I could not refrain from tears,
as, winding through the defiles of the rocks, the sad scenes
which had passed amongst them recurred to my memory.

Traversing a wild thicket, we soon regained the shore, where I
rambled a few minutes whilst the peasant went for the
boatmen.  The last streaks of light were quivering on the
waters when I stepped into the bark, and wrapping myself up in an
awning, slept till we reached Puzzoli, some of whose inhabitants
came forth with torches to light us home.

I was vexed to be roused from my visions, and had much rather
have sunk in some deep cave of the Cimmerians than returned to
Naples.

LETTER XXIV.

Naples
,

November
9
th
.

We made our excursion to Pompeii, passing through Portici, and
over the last lava of Mount Vesuvius.  I experienced a
strange mixture of sensations, on surveying at once the mischiefs
of the late eruption, in the ruin of villages, farms, and
vineyards; and all around them the most luxuriant and delightful
scenery of nature.  It was impossible to resist the
impressions of melancholy from viewing the former, or not to
admit that gaiety of spirits which was inspired by the sight of
the latter.  I say nothing of the Museum at Portici, which
we saw in our way, on account of the ample description of its
contents already given to the public, and because it should be
described no otherwise than by an exact catalogue, or by an
exhibition of engravings.  An hour and half brought us from
this celebrated repository to Pompeii.  Nothing can be
conceived more delightful than the climate and situation of this
city.  It stands upon a gently-rising hill, which commands
the bay of Naples, with the islands of Caprea and Ischia, the
rich coasts of Sorento, the tower of Castel a Mare; and on the
other side, Mount Vesuvius, with the lovely country
intervening.  It is judged to be about an Italian mile long,
and three and a half in circuit.  We entered the city at the
little gate which lies towards Stabiæ.  The first
object upon entering is a colonnade round a square court, which
seems to have formed a place of arms.  Behind the colonnade
is a series of little rooms, destined for the soldiers’
barracks.  The columns are of stone, plaistered with stucco
and coloured.  On several of them we found names scratched
in Greek and Latin; probably those of the soldiers who had been
quartered there.  Helmets and armour for various parts of
the body were discovered amongst the skeletons of some soldiers,
whose hard fate had compelled them to wait on duty, at the
perilous moment of the city’s approaching
destruction.  Dolphins and tridents, sculptured in relief on
most of these relics of armour, seem to show that they had been
fabricated for naval service.  Some of the sculptures on the
arms, probably belonging to officers, exhibit a greater variety
of ornaments.  The taking of Troy, wrought on one of the
helmets, is beautifully executed; and much may be said in
commendation of the work of several others.

We were next led to the remains of a temple and altar near
these barracks.  From thence to some rooms floored (as
indeed were almost all that have been cleared from the rubbish)
with tesselated mosaic pavements of various patterns, and most of
them of very excellent execution.  Many of these have been
taken up, and now form the floors of the rooms in the Museum at
Portici, whose best ornaments of every kind are furnished from
the discoveries at Pompeii.  From the rooms just mentioned
we descended into a subterraneous chamber, communicating with a
bathing apartment.  It appears to have served as a kind of
office to the latter.  It was probably here that the clothes
used in bathing were washed.  A fireplace, a capacious
cauldron of bronze, and earthen vessels, proper for that purpose,
found here, have given rise to the conjecture.  Contiguous
to this room is a small circular one with a fireplace, which was
the stove to the bath.  I should not forget to tell you that
the skeleton of the poor laundress (for so the antiquaries will
have it), who was very diligently washing the bathing clothes at
the time of the eruption, was found lying in an attitude of most
resigned death, not far from the washing cauldron in the office
just mentioned.

We were now conducted to the temple, or rather chapel, of
Isis.  The chief remains are a covered cloister; the great
altar on which was probably exhibited the statue of the goddess;
a little edifice to protect the sacred well; the pediment of the
chapel, with a symbolical vase in relief; ornaments in stucco, on
the front of the main building, consisting of the lotus, the
sistrum, representations of gods, Harpocrates, Anubis, and other
objects of Egyptian worship.  The figures on one side of
this temple are Perseus with the Gorgon’s head; on the
other side, Mars and Venus, with Cupids bearing the arms of
Mars.  We next observe three altars of different
sizes.  On one of them is said to have been found the bones
of a victim unconsumed, the last sacrifice having probably been
stopped by the dreadful calamity which had occasioned it.
From a niche in the temple was taken a statue of marble: a woman
pressing her lips with her forefinger.  Within the area is a
well, where the priest threw the ashes of the sacrifices.
We saw in the Museum at Portici some lovely arabesque paintings,
cut from the walls of the cloister.  The foliage which ran
round the whole sweep of the cloister itself is in the finest
taste.  A tablet of basalt with Egyptian hieroglyphics was
transported from thence to Portici, together with the following
inscription, taken from the front gate of the chapel:

N. POPIDUS N. F. CELSINUS.

AEDEM ISIDIS TERRAE MOTU
COLLAPSAM

A FUNDAMENTO P.  SUA
RESTITUIT

HUNC DECURIONES OB LIBERALITATEM

CUM ESSET ANNORUM SEX ORDINI SUO

GRATIS ADLEGERUNT.

Behind one of the altars we saw a small room, in which, our
guide informed us, a human skeleton had been discovered, with
some fish bones on a plate near it, and a number of other
culinary utensils.  We then passed on to another apartment,
almost contiguous, where nothing more remarkable had been found
than an iron crow: an instrument with which perhaps the
unfortunate wretch, whose skeleton I have mentioned above, had
vainly endeavoured to extricate herself, this room being probably
barricaded by the matter of the eruption.  This temple,
rebuilt, as the inscription imports, by N. Popidius, had been
thrown down by a terrible earthquake, that likewise destroyed a
great part of the city (sixteen years before the famous eruption
of Vesuvius described by Pliny, which happened in the first year
of Titus,
A.D.
79) and buried at
once both Herculaneum and Pompeii.  As I lingered alone in
these environs sacred to Isis, some time after my companions had
quitted them, I fell into one of those reveries which my
imagination is so fond of indulging; and transporting myself
seventeen hundred years back, fancied I was sailing with the
elder Pliny, on the first day’s eruption, from Misenum,
towards Retina and Herculaneum; and afterwards towards the villa
of his friend Pomponianus at Stabiæ.  The course of
our galley seldom carried us out of sight of Pompeii, and as
often as I could divert my attention from the tremendous
spectacle of the eruption, its enormous pillar of smoke standing
conically in the air, and tempests of liquid fire continually
bursting out from the midst of it, then raining down the sides of
the mountain, and flooding this beautiful coast with innumerable
streams of red-hot lava, methought I turned my eyes upon this
fair city, whose houses, villas, and gardens, with their long
ranges of columned courts and porticos, were made visible through
the universal cloud of ashes, by lightning from the mountain; and
saw its distracted inhabitants, men, women, and children, running
to and fro in despair.  But in one spot, I mean the court
and precincts of the temple, glared a continual light.  It
was the blaze of the altars; towards which I discerned a
long-robed train of priests moving in solemn procession, to
supplicate by prayer and sacrifice, at this destructive moment,
the intervention of Isis, who had taught the first fathers of
mankind the culture of the earth, and other arts of civil
life.  Methought I could distinguish in their hands all
those paintings and images, sacred to this divinity, brought out
on this portentous occasion, from the subterraneous apartments
and mystic cells of the temple.  There was every form of
creeping thing and abominable beast, every Egyptian pollution
which the true prophet had seen in vision, among the secret
idolatries of the temple at Jerusalem.  The priests arrived
at the altars; I saw them gathered round, and purifying the three
at once with the sacred meal; then, all moving slowly about them,
each with his right hand towards the fire: it was the office of
some to seize the firebrands of the altars, with which they
sprinkled holy water on the numberless bystanders.  Then
began the prayers, the hymns, and lustrations of the
sacrifice.  The priests had laid the victims with their
throats downward upon the altars; were ransacking the baskets of
flour and salt for the knives of slaughter, and proceeding in
haste to the accomplishment of their pious ceremonies;—when
one of our company, who thought me lost, returned with
impatience, and calling me off to some new object, put an end to
my strange reverie.  We were now summoned to pay some
attention to the scene and corridor of a theatre, not far from
the temple.  Little more of its remains being yet cleared
away, we hastened back to a small house and garden in the
neighbourhood of Isis.  Sir W. Hamilton (in his account of
Pompeii communicated to the Society of Antiquaries), when
speaking of this house, having taken occasion to give a general
idea of the private mansions of the ancient citizens, I shall
take the liberty of transcribing the whole passage.
“A covered cloister, supported by columns, goes round the
house, as was customary in many of the houses at Pompeii.
The rooms in general are very small, and in one, where an iron
bedstead was found, the wall had been pared away to make room for
this bedstead; so that it was not six feet square, and yet this
room was most elegantly painted, and had a tesselated or mosaic
floor.  The weight of the matter erupted from Mount Vesuvius
has universally damaged the upper parts of the houses; the lower
parts are mostly found as fresh as at the moment they were
buried.  The plan of most of the houses at Pompeii is a
square court, with a fountain in the middle, and small rooms
round, communicating with that court.  By the construction
and distribution of the houses, it seems, the inhabitants of
Pompeii were fond of privacy.  They had few windows towards
the street, except where, from the nature of the plan, they could
not avoid it; but even in that case the windows were placed too
high for anyone in the streets to overlook them.  Their
houses nearly resemble each other, both as to distribution of
plan, and in the manner of finishing the apartments.  The
rooms are in general small, from ten to twelve feet, and from
fourteen to eighteen feet; few communications between room and
room, almost all without windows, except the apartments situated
to the gardens, which are thought to have been allotted to the
women.  Their cortiles, or courts, were often surrounded by
porticos, even in very small houses; not but there were covered
galleries before the doors of their apartments to afford shade
and shelter.  No timber was used in finishing their
apartments, except in doors and windows.  The floors were
generally laid in mosaic work.  One general taste prevailed
of painting the sides and ceilings of the rooms.  Small
figures and medallions of low relief were sometimes
introduced.  Their great variety consisted in the colours,
and in the choice and delicacy of the ornaments, in which they
displayed great harmony and taste.  Their houses were some
two, others three stories high.”

We now pursued our way through what is with some probability
thought to have been the principal street.  Its narrowness,
however, surprised me.  It is scarcely eleven feet wide,
clear of the footways raised on each side of it.  The
pavement is formed of a large sort of flattish-surfaced pebbles;
not laid down with the greatest evenness or regularity.  The
sideways may be about a yard wide, each paved, irregularly
enough, with small stones.  There are guard stones at equal
intervals, to defend the foot passengers from carriages and
horses.  I cannot say I found anything either elegant or
pleasant in the effect of this open street.  But, as the
houses in general present little more than a dead wall towards
it, I do not imagine any views, beyond mere use and convenience,
were consulted in the plan.  It led us, however, through the
principal gate or entrance, to a sort of Villa Rustica, without
the limits of the city, which amply recompensed our
curiosity.  The arcade surrounding a square garden, or
courtyard, offers itself first to the observer’s
notice.  Into this open a number of coved rooms, adorned
with paintings of figures and arabesques.  These rooms,
though small, have a rich and elegant appearance, their ornaments
being very well executed, and retaining still their original
freshness.  On the top of the arcade runs a walk or open
terrace, leading to the larger apartments of the higher
story.  One of the rooms below has a capacious bow-window,
where several panes of glass, somewhat shattered, were found, but
in sufficient preservation to show that the ancients were not
without knowledge of this species of manufacture.  As Horace
and most of the old Latin Poets dwell much on the praises of
ancient conviviality, and appear to have valued themselves
considerably on their connoisseurship in wine, it was with great
pleasure I descended into the spacious cellars, sunk and vaulted
beneath the arcade above-mentioned.  Several earthen
amphoræ were standing in rows against the walls, but the
Massic and Falernian with which they were once stored, had
probably long been totally absorbed by the earth and ashes, which
were now the sole contents of these venerable jars.  The
ancients are thought to have used oil, instead of corks, and that
the stoppers were of some matter that could make but little
resistance, seems confirmed by the entrance of that, which now
supplied the place with wine.  The skeletons of several of
the family who had possessed this villa were discovered in the
cellar, together with brass and silver coins, and many such
ornaments of dress as were of more durable materials.  On
re-ascending, we went to the hot and cold baths; thence to the
back of the villa, separated by a passage from the more elegant
part of the house; we were shown some rooms which had been
occupied by the farmer, and from whence several implements of
agriculture had been carried, to enrich the collection at
Portici.  On the whole, the plan and construction of this
villa are extremely curious, and its situation very happily
chosen.  I could not, however, help feeling some regret, in
not having had the good fortune to be present at the first
discovery.  It must have been highly interesting to see all
its ancient relics (the greatest part of which are now removed)
each in its proper place; or, at least, in the place they had
possessed for so long a course of years.  His Sicilian
Majesty has ordered a correct draught of this villa to be taken,
which, it is hoped, will one day be published, with a complete
account of all the discoveries at Pompeii.

Our next walk was to see the Columbarium, a very solemn
looking edifice, where probably the families of higher rank only
at Pompeii, deposited the urns of their deceased kindred.
Several of these urns, with their ashes, and one among the rest
of glass, inclosed in another of earth, were dug out of the
sepulchral vaults.  A quantity of marble statues, of but
ordinary execution, and colossal masks of terra-cotta,
constituted the chief ornaments of the Columbarium.  It is
situated without the gates, on the same side of the city as the
villa just described.  There is something characteristically
sad in its aspect.  It threw my mind into a melancholy, but
not disagreeable tone.  Under the mixed sentiments it
inspired, I cast one lingering look back on the whole affecting
scene of ruins, over which I had for several hours been rambling,
and quitted it to return to Naples, not without great
reluctance.

LETTER XXV.

Rome
,

December
9
th
.

My last letter was despatched in such a hurry that I had not
time to conclude it.  This will be nearly as imperfect; but
yet I cannot forbear writing, having the vanity to believe that
you are pleased with hearing only that I am well.

Your friend H. walked with me this morning in the Loggios of
Raffaelle, and we went afterwards to the Capitol.  Nothing
delighted me more in the whole treasury of sculptures, than a
figure in alto relievo of Endymion, reclined on the
mountain’s brow: his head falls upon his breast with an
ease and gracefulness, of which the Greeks alone had ever a true
conception.  Most of the chambers, if you recollect, are
filled with the elegant remains of Adrian’s
collection.  The villa of that classic emperor at Tivoli,
must have been the most charming of structures.  Having
travelled into various and remote parts of his empire, he
assembled their most valuable ornaments on one spot.  Some
of his apartments were filled with the mysterious images and
symbols of Egypt: others with Eastern tripods and strange
Adriatic vases.  Though enraptured with St. Peter’s
and the Vatican, with the gardens and groves of pine, that
surround this interesting city, still I cannot help sighing after
my native hills and copses, which look (I know not how it
happens) more like the haunts of Pan than any I have seen in
Italy.  I eagerly anticipate the placid hours we shall pass,
perhaps next summer, on the wild range which belongs to our
sylvan deities.  In their deep fastnesses I will hide myself
from the world, and never allow its glare to bicker through my
foliage.  You will follow me, I trust, into retirement, and
equally forget the turmoils of mankind.  What have we
children of the good Sylvanus to do with the miseries or triumphs
of the savages that prowl about London?  Let us forget there
exists such a city, and when reposing amongst ivy and blossoms of
bloom, imagine ourselves in the ancient dominions of Saturn, and
dream that we see him pass along with his rustic attendants.

LETTER XXVI.

Augsburg
,

January
20
th
, 1781.

For these ten days past have I been traversing Lapland: winds
whistling in my ears, and cones showering down upon my head from
the wilds of pine through which our route conducted us.
Often were we obliged to travel by moonlight, and I leave you to
imagine the awful aspect of the Tyrol mountains buried in
snow.

I scarcely ventured to utter an exclamation of surprise,
though prompted by some of the most striking scenes in nature,
lest I should interrupt the sacred silence that prevails, during
winter, in these boundless solitudes.  The streams are
frozen, and mankind petrified, for aught I know to the contrary,
since whole days have we journeyed on without perceiving the
slightest hint of their existence.

I never before felt the pleasure of discovering a smoke rising
from a cottage, or of hearing a heifer lowing in its stall; and
could not have supposed there was so much satisfaction in
perceiving two or three fur caps, with faces under them, peeping
out of their concealments.  I wish you had been with me,
exploring this savage region: wrapped up in our bear-skins, we
should have followed its secret avenues, and penetrated, perhaps,
into some enchanted cave lined with sables, where, like the
heroes of northern romances, we should have been waited upon by
dwarfs, and sung drowsily to repose.  I think it no bad
scheme to sleep away five or six years to come, since every hour
affairs are growing more and more turbulent.  Well, let
them! provided we may enjoy, in security, the shades of our
thickets.

ADDITIONAL LETTERS.

[The following Letters, written in a second Excursion, which
was interrupted by a dangerous illness, are added on account of
their affinity to some of the preceding.]

LETTER I.

Cologne
,

May
28
th
, 1782.

This is the first day of summer; the oak leaves expand, the
roses blow, butterflies are about, and I have spirits enough to
write to you.  We have had clouded skies this fortnight
past, and roads like the Slough of Despond.  Last Wednesday
we were benighted on a dismal plain, apparently boundless.
The moon cast a sickly gleam, and now and then a blue meteor
glided along the morass which lay before us.

After much difficulty we gained an avenue, and in an
hour’s time discovered something like a gateway, shaded by
crooked elms and crowned by a cluster of turrets.  Here we
paused and knocked; no one answered.  We repeated our
knocks; the stout oaken gate returned a hollow sound; the horses
coughed, their riders blew their horns.  At length the bars
fell, and we entered—by what means I am ignorant, for no
human being appeared.

A labyrinth of narrow winding alleys, dark as the vaults of a
cathedral, opened to our view.  We kept wandering along, at
least twenty minutes, between lofty mansions with grated windows,
and strange galleries, projecting one over another, from which
depended innumerable uncouth figures and crosses, in iron-work,
swinging to and fro with the wind.  At the end of this
gloomy maze we found a long street, not fifteen feet wide, I am
certain; the houses still loftier than those in the alleys, the
windows thicker barred, and the gibbets (for I know not what else
to call them) more frequent.  Here and there we saw lights
glimmering in the highest stories, and arches on the right and
left, which seemed to lead into retired courts and deeper
darkness.

Along one of these recesses we were jumbled, over such
pavement as I hope you may never tread upon; and, after parading
round it, went out at the same arch whence we came in.  This
procession seemed at first very mystical, but it was too soon
accounted for by our postillions, who confessed they had lost
their way.  A council was held amongst them in form, and
then we struck into another labyrinth of hideous edifices,
habitations I will not venture to call them, as not a creature
stirred; though the rumbling of our carriages was echoed by all
the vaults and arches.

Towards midnight we rested a few minutes, and a head poking
out of a casement directed us to the hotel of Der Heilige Geist,
where an apartment, thirty feet square, was prepared for our
reception.

LETTER II.

Inspruck
,

June
4
th
.

No sooner had we passed Fuezen than we entered the Tyrol, and
the country of wonders.  Those lofty peaks, those steeps of
wood I delight in, lay before us.  Innumerable clear springs
gush out on every side, overhung by luxuriant shrubs in
blossom.  The day was mild, though overcast, and a soft blue
vapour rested upon the hills, above which rise mountains that
bear plains of snow into the clouds.

At night we lay at Nasariet, a village buried amongst savage
promontories.  The next morning we advanced, in bright
sunshine, into smooth lawns on the slopes of mountains, scattered
over with larches, whose delicate foliage formed a light green
veil to the azure sky.  Flights of birds were merrily
travelling from spray to spray.  I ran delighted into this
world of boughs, whilst C. sat down to draw the huts which are
scattered about for the shelter of herds, and discover themselves
amongst the groves in the most picturesque manner.

These little edifices are uncommonly neat, and excite those
ideas of pastoral life to which I am so fondly attached.
The turf from whence they rise is enamelled, in the strict sense
of the word, with flowers.  A sort of bluebell predominated,
brighter than ultramarine; here and there auriculas looked out of
the moss, and I often reposed upon tufts of ranunculus.
Bushes of phillerea were very frequent, the sun shining full on
their glossy leaves.  An hour passed away swiftly in these
pleasant groves, where I lay supine under a lofty fir, a tower of
leaves and branches.

LETTER III.

Padua
,

June
14
th
.

Once more, said I to myself, I shall have the delight of
beholding Venice; so got into an open chaise, the strangest
curricle that ever man was jolted in, and drove furiously along
the causeways by the Brenta, into whose deep waters it is a
mercy, methinks, I was not precipitated.  Fiesso, the Dolo,
the Mira, with all their gardens, statues, and palaces, seemed
flying after each other, so rapid was our motion.

After a few hours’ confinement between close steeps, the
scene opened to the wide shore of Fusina.  I looked up (for
I had scarcely time to look before) and beheld a troubled sky,
shot with vivid red, the Lagunes tinted like the opal, and the
islands of a glowing flame-colour.  The lofty mountains of
the distant continent appeared of a deep melancholy grey, and
innumerable gondolas were passing to and fro in all their
blackness.  The sun, after a long struggle, was swallowed up
in the tempestuous clouds.

In an hour we drew near to Venice, and saw its world of domes
rising out of the waters.  A fresh breeze bore the toll of
innumerable bells by my ear.  Sadness came over me as I
entered the great canal, and recognised (the scene of many a
strange adventure) those solemn palaces, with their lofty arcades
and gloomy arches, beneath which I had so often sat.

The Venetians being mostly at their villas on the Brenta, the
town appeared deserted.  I visited, however, all my old
haunts in the Place of St. Mark, ran up the Campanile, and rowed
backwards and forwards, opposite the Ducal Palace, by
moonlight.  They are building a spacious quay, near the
street of the Sclavonians, fronting the island of San Giorgio
Maggiore, where I remained alone at least an hour, following the
wanderings of the moon amongst mountainous clouds, and listening
to the waters dashing against marble steps.

I closed my evening at my friend M. de R.’s, and sung
over the airs I composed in the dawn of our acquaintance.

Next morning the wind was uncommonly violent for the mild
season of June, and the canals much agitated; but I was
determined to visit the Lido once more, and bathe on my
accustomed beach.  The pines in the garden of the
Carthusians were nodding as I passed by in my gondola, which was
very poetically buffeted by the waves.

Traversing the desert of locusts, I hailed the Adriatic, and
plunged into its bosom.  The sea, delightfully cool,
refreshed me to such a degree, that, upon my return to Venice, I
found myself able to thread its labyrinths of streets, canals,
and alleys, in search of amber and Oriental curiosities.
The variety of exotic merchandize, the perfume of coffee, the
shade of awnings, and the sight of Greeks and Asiatics sitting
crossed-legged under them, made me think myself in the bazaars of
Constantinople.

’Tis certain my beloved town of Venice ever recalls a
series of Eastern ideas and adventures.  I cannot help
thinking St. Mark’s a mosque, and the neighbouring palace
some vast seraglio, full of arabesque saloons, embroidered sofas,
and voluptuous Circassians.

LETTER IV.

Padua
,

June
19
th
.

The morning was delightful, and St. Anthony’s bells in
full chime.  A shower which had fallen in the night rendered
the air so cool and grateful, that Mad. de R. and myself
determined to seize the opportunity and go to Mirabello, a
country house, which Algarotti had inhabited, situate amongst the
Euganean hills, eight or nine miles from Padua.

Our road lay between poplar alleys and fields of yellow corn,
overhung by garlands of vine, most beautifully green.  I
soon found myself in the midst of my favourite hills, upon slopes
covered with clover, and shaded by cherry-trees.  Bending
down their boughs I gathered the fruit, and grew cooler and
happier every instant.

We dined very comfortably in a strange hall, where I pitched
my pianoforte, and sang the voluptuous airs of Bertoni’s
Armida.  That enchantress might have raised her palace in
this situation; and, had I been Rinaldo, I certainly should not
very soon have abandoned it.

After dinner we drank coffee under some branching lemons,
which sprang from a terrace, commanding a boundless scene of
towers and villas; tall cypresses and shrubby hillocks rising,
like islands, out of a sea of corn and vine.

Evening drawing on, and the breeze blowing fresh from the
distant Adriatic, I reclined on a slope, and turned my eyes
anxiously towards Venice; then upon some little fields hemmed in
by chestnuts in blossom, where the peasants were making their
hay, and, from thence, to a mountain, crowned by a circular grove
of fir and cypress.

In the centre of these shades some monks have a comfortable
nest; perennial springs, a garden of delicious vegetables, and, I
dare say, a thousand luxuries besides, which the poor mortals
below never dream of.

Had it not been late, I should certainly have climbed up to
the grove, and asked admittance into its recesses; but having no
mind to pass the night in this eyrie, I contented myself with the
distant prospect.

LETTER V.

Rome
,

June
29
th
.

It is needless for me to say I wish you with me: you know I
do; you know how delightfully we should ramble about Rome
together.  This evening, instead of jiggeting along the
Corso with the puppets in blue and silver coats, and green and
gold coaches, instead of bowing to Cardinal this, and dotting my
head to Abbé t’other, I strolled to the Coliseo,
found out my old haunts amongst its arches, and enjoyed the pure
transparent sky between groves of slender cypress.  Then
bending my course to the Palatine Mount, I passed under the Arch
of Titus, and gained the Capitol, which was quite deserted, the
world, thank Heaven, being all slip-slopping in coffee-houses, or
staring at a few painted boards patched up before the Colonna
palace, where, by the by, to-night is a grand
rinfresco

for all the dolls and doll-fanciers of Rome.  I heard their
buzz at a distance; that was enough for me!

Soothed by the rippling of waters, I descended the Capitoline
stairs, and leaned several minutes against one of the Egyptian
lionesses.  This animal has no knack at oracles, or else it
would have murmured out to me the situation of that secret cave,
where the wolf suckled Romulus and his brother.

About nine, I returned home, and am now writing to you like a
prophet on the housetop.  Behind me rustle the thickets of
Villa Medici; before, lies roof beyond roof and dome beyond dome:
these are dimly discovered; but don’t you see the great
cupola of cupolas, twinkling with illuminations?  The town
is real, I am certain; but, surely, that structure of fire must
be visionary.

LETTER VI.

Rome
,

June
30
th
.

As soon as the sun declined I strolled into the Villa Medici;
but finding it haunted by fine pink and yellow people, nay, even
by the Spanish Ambassador, and several more dignified carcasses,
I moved off to the Negroni garden.  There I found what my
soul desired, thickets of jasmine, and wild spots overgrown with
bay; long alleys of cypress totally neglected, and almost
impassable through the luxuriance of the vegetation; on every
side antique fragments, vases, sarcophagi, and altars sacred to
the Manes, in deep, shady recesses, which I am certain the Manes
must love.  The air was filled with the murmurs of water,
trickling down basins of porphyry, and losing itself amongst
overgrown weeds and grasses.

Above the wood and between its boughs appeared several domes,
and a strange lofty tower.  I will not say they belong to
St. Maria Maggiore; no, they are fanes and porticos dedicated to
Cybele, who delights in sylvan situations.  The forlorn air
of this garden, with its high and reverend shades, make me
imagine it as old as the baths of Dioclesian, which peep over one
of its walls.  Yes, I am persuaded some consul or
prætor dwelt here only fifty years ago.  Would to God,
our souls might be transported to such solitary spots! where we
might glide along the dark alleys together, when bodies were gone
to bed.  I discovered a little cave that would just suit us;
celandine, Venus’ hair, and a thousand delicate plants,
growing downwards from the cave; beneath lies a clear spring.

At the close of day, I repaired to the platform before the
stately porticos of the Lateran.  There I sat, folded up in
myself.  Some priests jarred the iron gates behind me.
I looked over my shoulder through the portals, into the
portico.  Night began to fill it with darkness.  Upon
turning round, the sad waste of the Campagna met my eyes, and I
wished to go home, but had not the power.  A pressure, like
that I have felt in horrid dreams, seemed to fix me to the
pavement.

I was thus in a manner forced to view the dreary scene, the
long line of aqueducts and lonesome towers.  Perhaps the
unwholesome vapours, rising like blue mists from the plains,
affected me.  I know not how it was; but I never experienced
such strange, such chilling terrors.  About ten
o’clock, thank God, the spell dissolved; I found my limbs
at liberty, and returned home.

LETTER VII.

Naples
,

July
8
th
.

The sea-breezes restored me to life.  I set the heat of
midday at defiance, and do not believe in the horrors of the
sirocco.  Yesterday I passed at Portici, with Lady H.
The morning, refreshing and pleasant, invited us at an early hour
into the open air.  We drove, in an uncovered chaise, to the
royal Bosquetto: no other carriage than Sir W.’s is allowed
to enter its alleys.  We breathed a fresh air untainted by
dust or garlic.  Every now and then, amidst wild bushes of
ilex and myrtle, one finds a graceful antique statue, sometimes a
fountain, and often a rude knoll, where the rabbits sit
undisturbed, contemplating the blue glittering bay; at least, I
should do so, if I were a rabbit.

The walls of this shady inclosure are lined with Peruvian
aloes, whose white blossoms, scented like those of the magnolia,
form the most magnificent clusters.  They are plants to
salute respectfully as one passes by, such is their size and
dignity.  In the midst of the thickets stands the
King’s Pagliaro, surrounded by gardens with hedges of
luxuriant jasmine, whose branches are suffered to flaunt as much
as Nature pleases.

The morning sun darted his first rays on their flowers just as
I entered this pleasant spot.  The hut looks as if erected
in the days of fairy pastoral life; its neatness is quite
delightful.  Bright tiles compose the floor; straw, nicely
platted, covers the walls.  In the middle of the room, you
see a table spread with a beautiful Persian carpet; at one end,
four niches with mattresses of silk, where the King and his
favourites repose after dinner; at the other, a white marble
basin.  Mount a little staircase, and you find yourself in
another apartment, formed by the roof, which being entirely
composed of glistening straw, casts that comfortable yellow glow
I admire.  From the windows you look into the garden, not
flourished with parterres, but divided into plats of fragrant
herbs and flowers, with here and there a little marble table, or
basin of the purest water.

These sequestered inclosures are cultivated with the greatest
care, and so frequently watered, that I observed lettuces, and a
variety of other vegetables, as fresh as in our green
England.

AN EXCURSION TO THE GRAND CHARTREUSE IN THE YEAR 1778.

The Grand Chartreuse
has exceeded
my expectations; it is more wonderfully wild than I can describe,
or even you can imagine.  It has possessed me to such a
degree that at present I can neither think, speak, nor write upon
any other subject.

June
5
th
.—I left Geneva, and after passing
through a succession of valleys between innumerable mountains,
and after crossing a variety of picturesque bridges, thrown over
the streams which water them, arrived at Aix, in Savoy, famous
for its baths, which, as disagreeable things are generally the
most salutary, ought doubtless to be of the greatest efficacy;
for more uninviting objects one seldom meets with.

Advancing beneath a little eminence, partly rock, partly wall,
we discovered the principal bath, filled with a blue reeking
water, whose very steam is sufficient to seethe one without
further assistance.

Scarce had we stood looking on it a minute, before down dashed
three or four dirty boys, as copper-coloured as the natives of
Bengal; who by splashing us all over, and swimming about

à la crapaudine
, convinced us that it was not their
fault, if we would not have companions in the delights of
bathing.  I soon hurried away from this salubrious cauldron,
and stepping into a little chapel hard by, where they were
singing vespers, prayed heartily to the Virgin, that I might
never need the assistance of those wonder-working waters over
which she presides.  As there was but little company in the
town, and little amusement, I went to bed at nine, and rose at
four the next morning, that I might reach before sunset the
celebrated road, which Charles Emanuel had cut through a rocky
mountain.  My plan succeeded, and after dining at Chambery
(a place scarce worth speaking of to you), and passing by a
cataract that throws itself from a lofty steep, I began to
discover a beautiful woody vale, terminated on one side by the
hallowed cliffs of the Grand Chartreuse, and on the other by the
mountain which Charles Emanuel had perforated in so extraordinary
a manner.  The sun was just sinking in a brilliant cloud,
which seemed to repose on a swelling hill, covered with cattle,
when we quitted the cheerful valley, and began to descend between
two ridges of precipices, that at some distance had the
appearance of towering ramparts.  Pursuing our route, we
found ourselves in a deep cleft, surrounded by caverns, echoing
with a thousand rills which trickle down their sides, and
mingling their murmurs with the rattling of our wheels and the
steps of our horses, infinitely repeated and multiplied, formed,
altogether, the strangest combination of sounds that ever reached
my ears.  The road itself is admirably cut, and hewn with
such neatness that, were it not for the savage and desolate air
of its environs, I should have imagined myself approaching some
grand castle or considerable city.  Toward the summits of
the precipices, that in some places rise to a majestic elevation
(the two sides here and there nearly meeting in an arch), hang
light woods of glossy green, which, being agitated by a gentle
wind, cast a moving shadow over the cleft beneath, and, at a
little distance, gave our road the appearance of a chequered
pavement.

Having wound through the bosom of the mountain for some time,
I was struck by the unexpected appearance of a grand edifice,
resembling a vast portal, supported by Doric pilasters, and
crowned with an ornamented pediment.  Upon my nearer
approach I found a smooth tablet filling up the space I had
allotted for an entrance, on which was engraven a pompous Latin
inscription, setting forth with what incredible labour and
perseverance his Majesty, Charles Emanuel the Second of Sardinia,
Cyprus, and Jerusalem, King, had cut this road through the
mountain; which great enterprise, though unattempted by the
Romans, and despaired of by other nations, was executed under his
auspices.  I very sincerely wished him joy, and, as the
evening was growing rather cool, was not sorry to perceive,
through an opening in the rocks, a wide-extended plain,
interspersed with meadows, embosomed by woods, in which I
distinguished Les Echelles, a village, where we were to lie, with
its chimneys smoking, under the base of one of the Carthusian
mountains, round which had gathered a concourse of red and
greyish clouds.

The twilight was beginning to prevail when we reached our inn,
and very glad I was to leave it at the first dawn of the next
day.  We were now obliged to abandon our coach; and taking
horse, proceeded towards the mountains, which, with the valleys
between them, form what is called the Desert of the
Carthusians.

In an hour’s time we were drawing near, and could
discern the opening of a narrow valley overhung by shaggy
precipices, above which rose lofty peaks, covered to their very
summits with wood.  We could now distinguish the roar of
torrents, and a confusion of strange sounds, issuing from dark
forests of pine.  I confess at this moment I was somewhat
startled.  I experienced some disagreeable sensations, and
it was not without a degree of unwillingness that I left the gay
pastures and enlivening sunshine, to throw myself into this
gloomy and disturbed region.  How dreadful, thought I, must
be the despair of those who enter it never to return!

But after the first impression was worn away, all my curiosity
redoubled; and desiring our guide to put forward with greater
speed, we made such good haste, that the meadows and cottages of
the plain were soon left far behind, and we found ourselves on
the banks of the torrent, whose agitation answered the ideas
which its sounds had inspired.  Into the midst of these
troubled waters we were obliged to plunge with our horses, and,
when landed on the opposite shore, were by no means displeased to
have passed them.

We had now closed with the forests, over which the impending
rocks diffused an additional gloom.  The day grew obscured
by clouds, and the sun no longer enlightened the distant plains,
when we began to ascend towards the entrance of the desert,
marked by two pinnacles of rock far above us, beyond which a
melancholy twilight prevailed.  Every moment we approached
nearer and nearer to the sounds which had alarmed us; and,
suddenly emerging from the woods, we discovered several mills and
forges, with many complicated machines of iron, hanging over the
torrent, that threw itself headlong from a cleft in the
precipices; on one side of which I perceived our road winding
along, till it was stopped by a venerable gateway.  A rock
above one of the forges was hollowed into the shape of a round
tower, of no great size, but resembling very much an altar in
figure; and, what added greatly to the grandeur of the object,
was a livid flame continually palpitating upon it, which the
gloom of the valley rendered perfectly discernible.

The road, at a small distance from this remarkable scene, was
become so narrow, that, had my horse started, I should have been
but too well acquainted with the torrent that raged beneath;
dismounting, therefore, I walked towards the edge of the great
fall, and there, leaning on a fragment of cliff, looked down into
the foaming gulph, where the waters were hurled along over broken
pines, pointed rocks, and stakes of iron.  Then, lifting up
my eyes, I took in the vast extent of the forests, frowning on
the brows of the mountains.

It was here first I felt myself seized by the genius of the
place, and penetrated with veneration of its religious gloom;
and, I believe, uttered many extravagant exclamations; but, such
was the dashing of the wheels, and the rushing of the waters at
the bottom of the forges, that what I said was luckily
undistinguishable.

I was not yet, however, within the consecrated inclosure, and
therefore not perfectly contented; so, leaving my fragment, I
paced in silence up the path which led to the great portal.
When we arrived before it, I rested a moment, and leaning against
the stout oaken gate, which closed up the entrance to this
unknown region, felt at my heart a certain awe, that brought to
my mind the sacred terror of those, in ancient days, going to be
admitted into the Eleusinian mysteries.

My guide gave two knocks; after a solemn pause, the gate was
slowly opened, and all our horses having passed through it, was
again carefully closed.

I now found myself in a narrow dell, surrounded on every side
by peaks of the mountains, rising almost beyond my sight, and
shelving downwards till their bases were hidden by the foam and
spray of the water, over which hung a thousand withered and
distorted trees.  The rocks seemed crowding upon me, and, by
their particular situation, threatened to obstruct every ray of
light; but, notwithstanding the menacing appearance of the
prospect, I still kept following my guide, up a craggy ascent,
partly hewn through a rock, and bordered by the trunks of ancient
fir-trees, which formed a fantastic barrier, till we came to a
dreary and exposed promontory, impending directly over the
dell.

The woods are here clouded with darkness, and the torrents,
rushing with additional violence, are lost in the gloom of the
caverns below; every object, as I looked downwards from my path,
that hung midway between the base and the summit of the cliff,
was horrid and woeful.  The channel of the torrent sunk deep
amidst frightful crags, and the pale willows and wreathed roots
spreading over it, answered my ideas of those dismal abodes,
where, according to the druidical mythology, the ghosts of
conquered warriors were bound.  I shivered whilst I was
regarding these regions of desolation, and, quickly lifting up my
eyes to vary the scene, I perceived a range of whitish cliffs,
glistening with the light of the sun, to emerge from these
melancholy forests.

On a fragment that projected over the chasm, and concealed for
a moment its terrors, I saw a cross, on which was written
VIA COELI
.  The cliffs being the
heaven to which I now aspired, we deserted the edge of the
precipice, and ascending, came to a retired nook of the rocks, in
which several copious rills had worn irregular grottoes.
Here we reposed an instant, and were enlivened with a few
sunbeams, piercing the thickets and gilding the waters that
bubbled from the rock, over which hung another cross, inscribed
with this short sentence, which the situation rendered
wonderfully pathetic,
O SPES UNICA
!
the fervent exclamation of some wretch disgusted with the world,
whose only consolation was found in this retirement.

We quitted this solitary cross to enter a thick forest of
beech-trees, that screened in some measure the precipices on
which they grew, catching, however, every instant terrifying
glimpses of the torrent below.  Streams gushed from every
crevice in the cliffs, and falling over the mossy roots and
branches of the beech, hastened to join the great torrent,
athwart which I every now and then remarked certain tottering
bridges, and sometimes could distinguish a Carthusian crossing
over to his hermitage, that just peeped above the woody
labyrinths on the opposite shore.

Whilst I was proceeding amongst the innumerable trunks of the
beech trees, my guide pointed out to me a peak, rising above the
others, which he called the Throne of Moses.  If that
prophet had received his revelations in this desert, no voice
need have declared it holy ground, for every part of it is
stamped with such a sublimity of character as would alone be
sufficient to impress the idea.

Having left these woods behind, and crossing a bridge of many
lofty arches, I shuddered once more at the impetuosity of the
torrent; and, mounting still higher, came at length to a kind of
platform before two cliffs, joined by an arch of rock, under
which we were to pursue our road.  Below we beheld again
innumerable streams, turbulently precipitating themselves from
the woods, and lashing the base of the mountains, mossed over
with a dark sea-green.

In this deep hollow such mists and vapours prevailed as
hindered my prying into its recesses; besides, such was the
dampness of the air, that I hastened gladly from its
neighbourhood, and passing under the second portal, beheld with
pleasure the sunbeams gilding the Throne of Moses.

It was now about ten o’clock, and my guide assured me I
should soon discover the convent.  Upon this information I
took new courage, and continued my route on the edge of the
rocks, till we struck into another gloomy grove.  After
turning about it for some time, we entered again into the glare
of daylight, and saw a green valley skirted by ridges of cliffs
and sweeps of wood before us.  Towards the farther end of
this inclosure, on a gentle acclivity, rose the revered turrets
of the Carthusians, which extend in a long line on the brow of
the hill; beyond them a woody amphitheatre majestically presents
itself, terminated by spires of rock and promontories lost
amongst the clouds.

The roar of the torrent was now but faintly distinguishable,
and all the scenes of horror and confusion I had passed, were
succeeded by a sacred and profound calm.  I traversed the
valley with a thousand sensations I despair of describing, and
stood before the gate of the convent with as much awe as some
novice or candidate, newly arrived, to solicit the holy
retirement of the order.

As admittance is more readily granted to the English than to
almost any other nation, it was not long before the gates opened,
and whilst the porter ordered our horses to the stable, we
entered a court watered by two fountains and built round with
lofty edifices, characterized by a noble simplicity.

The interior portal, opening, discovered an arched aisle,
extending till the perspective nearly met, along which windows,
but scantily distributed between the pilasters, admitted a pale
solemn light, just sufficient to distinguish the objects with a
picturesque uncertainty.  We had scarcely set our feet on
the pavement when the monks began to issue from an arch, about
half way down, and passing in a long succession from their
chapel, bowed reverently with much humility and meekness, and
dispersed in silence, leaving one of their body alone in the
aisle.

The Father Coadjutor (for he only remained) advanced towards
us with great courtesy, and welcomed us in a manner which gave me
far more pleasure than all the frivolous salutations and affected
greetings so common in the world beneath.  After asking us a
few indifferent questions, he called one of the lay brothers, who
live in the convent under less severe restrictions than the
fathers whom they serve, and ordering him to prepare our
apartment, conducted us to a large square hall with casement
windows, and, what was more comfortable, an enormous chimney,
whose hospitable hearth blazed with a fire of dry aromatic fir,
on each side of which were two doors that communicated with the
neat little cells destined for our bedchambers.

Whilst he was placing us round the fire, a ceremony by no
means unimportant in the cold climate of these upper regions, a
bell rang which summoned him to prayers.  After charging the
lay brother to set before us the best fare their desert afforded,
he retired, and left us at full liberty to examine our
chambers.

The weather lowered, and the casements permitted very little
light to enter the apartment: but on the other side it was amply
enlivened by the gleams of the fire, that spread all over a
certain comfortable air, which even sunshine but rarely
diffuses.  Whilst the showers descended with great violence,
the lay brother and another of his companions were placing an
oval table, very neatly carved and covered with the finest linen,
in the middle of the hall; and, before we had examined a number
of portraits which were hung in all the panels of the wainscot,
they called us to a dinner widely different from what might have
been expected in so dreary a situation.  The best fish, the
most exquisite fruits, and a variety of dishes, excellent without
the assistance of meat, were served up with an order and
arrangement that showed it was not the first time they had
entertained in the noblest manner.  But I was not more
struck with the delicacy of the entertainment, than with the
extreme cleanness and English-like neatness of the whole
apartment and its furniture.  A marble fountain,
particularly, gave it a very agreeable aid, and the water that
fell from it into a porphyry shell was remarkable for its
clearness and purity.  Our attendant friar was helping us to
some Burgundy, which we pronounced of very respectable antiquity,
when the Coadjutor returned, accompanied by two other fathers,
the Secretary and Procurator, whom he presented to us.  You
would have been both charmed and surprised with the cheerful
resignation that appeared in their countenances, and with the
easy turn of their conversation.

The Coadjutor, though equally kind, was as yet more reserved:
his countenance, however, spoke for him without the aid of words,
and there was in his manner a mixture of dignity and humility,
which could not fail to interest.  There were moments when
the recollection of some past event seemed to shade his
countenance with a melancholy that rendered it still more
affecting.  I should suspect he formerly possessed a great
share of natural vivacity (something of it being still, indeed,
apparent in his more unguarded moments); but this spirit is
almost entirely subdued by the penitence and mortification of the
order.

The secretary displayed a very considerable share of knowledge
in the political state of Europe, furnished probably by the
extensive correspondence these fathers preserve with the three
hundred and sixty subordinate convents, dispersed throughout all
those countries where the court of Rome still maintains its
influence.

In the course of our conversation they asked me innumerable
questions about England, where formerly, they said, many
monasteries had belonged to their order; and principally that of
W., which they had learnt to be now in my possession.

The Secretary, almost with tears in his eyes, beseeched me to
revere these consecrated edifices, and to preserve their remains,
for the sake of St. Hugo, their canonized Prior.  I replied
greatly to his satisfaction, and then declaimed so much in favour
of Saint Bruno, and the holy prior of Witham, that the good
fathers grew exceedingly delighted with the conversation, and
made me promise to remain some days with them.  I readily
complied with their request, and, continuing in the same strain,
that had so agreeably affected their ears, was soon presented
with the works of Saint Bruno, whom I so zealously admired.

After we had sat extolling them, and talking upon much the
same sort of subjects for about an hour, the Coadjutor proposed a
walk amongst the cloisters and galleries, as the weather would
not admit of any longer excursion.  He leading the way, we
ascended a flight of steps, which brought us to a gallery, on
each side of which a vast number of pictures, representing the
dependent convents, were ranged; for I was now in the capital of
the order, where the General resides, and from whence he issues
forth his commands to his numerous subjects; who depute the
superiors of their respective convents, whether situated in the
wilds of Calabria, the forests of Poland, or in the remotest
districts of Portugal and Spain, to assist at the grand chapter,
held annually under him, a week or two after Easter.

This reverend father Dom Biclét died about ten days
before our arrival: a week ago they elected the Pere
Robinét prior of the Carthusian convent at Paris in his
room, and two fathers were now on their route to apprise him of
their choice, and to salute him General of the Carthusians.
During this interregnum the Coadjutor holds the first rank in the
temporal, and the Grand Vicaire in the spiritual, affairs of the
order; both of which are very extensive.

If I may judge from the representations of the different
convents, which adorn this gallery, there are many highly worthy
of notice, for the singularity of their situations, and the wild
beauties of the landscapes which surround them.  The
Venetian Chartreuse, placed in a woody island, and that of Rome,
rising from amongst groups of majestic ruins, struck me as
peculiarly pleasing.  Views of the English monasteries hung
formerly in such a gallery, but had been destroyed by fire,
together with the old convent.  The list only remains, with
but a very few written particulars concerning them.

Having amused myself for some time with the pictures, and the
descriptions the Coadjutor gave me of them, we quitted the
gallery and entered a kind of chapel, in which were two altars
with lamps burning before them, on each side of a lofty
portal.  This opened into a grand coved hall, adorned with
historical paintings of St. Bruno’s life, and the portraits
of the Generals of the order, since the year of the great
founder’s death (1085) to the present time.  Under
these portraits are the stalls for the Superiors, who assist at
the grand convocation.  In front appears the General’s
throne; above, hangs a representation of the canonized Bruno,
crowned with stars.

Were I, after walking along the dim cloisters, and passing
through the antechapel, faintly illuminated by a solitary lamp,
suddenly to enter this hall at midnight, when the convocation is
assembled, and the synod of venerable fathers, all in solemn
order, surrounding the successor of Bruno, it would be a long
while, I believe, before I could recover from the surprise of so
august a spectacle.  It must indeed be a very imposing
sight: the gravity they preserve on these occasions, their
venerable age (for Superiors cannot be chosen young), and the
figures of their deceased Generals, dimly discovered above, may
surely be allowed to awe even an heretical spectator into a
momentary respect for the order.  For my own part, I must
confess, that the hall, though divested of all this
accompaniment, filled me with a veneration I scarcely knew how to
account for; perhaps the portraits inspired it.  They were
all well executed, and mostly in attitudes of adoration.
The form of Bruno was almost lost in the splendour of the stars
which hovered over him.  I could in some moments fancy
myself capable of plunging into the horror of a desert, and
foregoing all the vanities and delights of the world, to secure
my memory so sublime a consecration.

The Coadjutor seemed charmed with the respect with which I
looked round on these holy objects; and if the hour of vespers
had not been drawing near, we should have spent more time in the
contemplation of Bruno’s miracles, portrayed on the lower
panels of the hall.  We left that room to enter a winding
passage (lighted by windows in the roof), that brought us to a
cloister six hundred feet in length, from which branched off two
others, joining a fourth of the same most extraordinary
dimensions.  Vast ranges of slender pillars extend round the
different courts of the edifice, many of which are thrown into
gardens belonging to particular cells.

We entered one of them: its inhabitant received us with much
civility, walked before us through a little corridor that looked
on his garden, showed us his narrow dwelling, and, having
obtained leave of the Coadjutor to speak, gave us his
benediction, and beheld us depart with concern.  Nature has
given this poor monk very considerable talents for
painting.  He has drawn the portrait of the late General, in
a manner that discovers great facility of execution; but he is
not allowed to exercise his pencil on any other subject, lest he
should be amused; and amusement in this severe order is a
crime.  He had so subdued, so mortified an appearance, that
I was not sorry to hear the bell, which summoned the Coadjutor to
prayers, and prevented my entering any more of the cells.
We continued straying from cloister to cloister, and wandering
along the winding passages and intricate galleries of this
immense edifice, whilst the Coadjutor was assisting at
vespers.

In every part of the structure reigned the most death-like
calm: no sound reached my ears but the “minute drops from
off the eaves.”  I sat down in a niche of the
cloister, and fell into a profound reverie, from which I was
recalled by the return of our conductor; who, I believe, was
almost tempted to imagine, from the cast of my countenance, that
I was deliberating whether I should not remain with them for
ever.

But I soon roused myself, and testified some impatience to see
the great chapel, at which we at length arrived, after traversing
another labyrinth of cloisters.  The gallery immediately
before its entrance appeared quite gay, in comparison with the
others I had passed, and owes its cheerfulness to a large window
(ornamented with slabs of polished marble), that admits the view
of a lovely wood.  Being neatly glazed, and free from
paintings or Gothic ornaments, it allows a full blaze of light to
dart on the chapel door; which is also adorned with marble, in a
plain but noble style of architecture.

The father sacristan stood ready on the steps of the portal to
grant us admittance; and, throwing open the valves, we entered
the chapel and were struck by the justness of its proportions,
the simple majesty of the arched roof, and the mild solemn light,
equally diffused over every part of the edifice.  No tawdry
ornaments, no glaring pictures, disgraced the sanctity of the
place.  The high altar, standing distinct from the walls,
which were hung with a rich velvet, was the only object on which
many ornaments were lavished, and even there the elegance of the
workmanship concealed the glare of the materials, which were
silver, solid gold, and the most costly gems.  It being
Whit-Sunday, this altar was covered with statues of gold,
shrines, and candelabra of the stateliest shape and most delicate
execution.  Four of the latter, of a gigantic size, were
placed on the steps; which, together with part of the inlaid
floor within the choir, were spread with beautiful carpets.

The illumination of so many tapers striking on the shrines,
censers, and pillars of polished jasper, sustaining the canopy of
the altar, produced a wonderful effect; and, as the rest of the
chapel was visible only by the faint external light admitted from
above, the splendour and dignity of the altar was enhanced by
contrast.  I retired a moment from it, and seating myself in
one of the furthermost stalls of the choir, looked towards it,
and fancied it had risen like an exhalation.

Here I remained several minutes breathing nothing but incense,
and should not have quitted my station soon, had I not been
apprehensive of disturbing the devotions of two aged fathers who
had just entered, and were prostrating themselves before the
steps of the altar.  These venerable figures added greatly
to the solemnity of the scene; which as the day declined
increased every moment in splendour; for the sparkling of several
lamps of chased silver that hung from the roofs, and the gleaming
of nine huge tapers which I had not before noticed, began to be
visible just as I left the chapel.

Passing through the sacristy, where lay several piles of rich
embroidered vestments, purposely displayed for our inspection, we
regained the cloister which led to our apartment, where the
supper was ready prepared.  We had scarcely finished it,
when the Coadjutor, and the fathers who had accompanied us
before, returned, and ranging themselves round the fire, resumed
the conversation about St. Bruno.

Finding me very piously disposed by the wonders I had seen in
the day to listen to things of a miraculous nature, they began to
relate the inspirations they had received from him, and his
mysterious apparitions.  I was all attention, respect, and
credulity.  The old Secretary worked himself up to such a
pitch of enthusiasm, that I am very much inclined to imagine he
believed, in these moments, all the marvellous events he
related.  The Coadjutor being less violent in his
pretensions to St. Bruno’s modern miracles, contented
himself with enumerating the noble works he had done in the days
of his fathers, and in the old time before them.

It grew rather late before my kind hosts had finished their
narrations, and I was not sorry, after all the exercise I had
taken, to return to my cell, where everything invited to
repose.  I was charmed with the neatness and oddity of my
little apartment; its cabin-like bed, oratory, and ebony
crucifix; in short, everything it contained; not forgetting the
aromatic odour of the pine, with which it was roofed, floored,
and wainscoted.  The night was luckily dark.  Had the
moon appeared, I could not have prevailed upon myself to have
quitted her till very late; but, as it happened, I crept into my
cabin, and was by “whispering winds soon lulled
asleep.”

Eight o’clock struck next morning before I awoke; when,
to my great sorrow, I found the peaks, which rose above the
convent, veiled in vapours, and the rain descending with
violence.

After we had breakfasted by the light of our fire (for the
casements admitted but a very feeble gleam), I sat down to the
works of St. Bruno; of all medleys the strangest.
Allegories without end: a theologico-natural history of birds,
beasts, and fishes: several chapters on paradise; the delights of
solitude; the glory of Solomon’s temple; the new Jerusalem;
and numberless other wonderful subjects, full of enthusiasm and
superstition.

Saint Bruno was certainly a mighty genius; I admire the
motives which drew him to this desert; but perhaps before we come
to that part of the story, you will like to know what preceded
it.  My Saint (for Bruno has succeeded Thomas of Canterbury)
was of noble descent, and possessed considerable wealth.  He
was not less remarkable for the qualities of his mind, and his
talents gained him the degree of Master of the great sciences in
the University of Rheims; here he contracted a friendship with
Odo, afterwards Urban the Second.  Being always poetic,
singular, and visionary, he soon grew disgusted with the world,
and began early in life to sigh after retirement.  His
residence at Grenoble, where he was invited by Hugo, its bishop,
determined him to the monastic state.

This venerable prelate imparted to him a vision in which he
seemed to behold the desert and mountain beyond his city visible
in the dead of night by the streaming of seven lucid stars that
hung directly over them.  Whilst he was ardently gazing at
this wonder, a still voice was heard declaring it the future
abode of Bruno—by him to be consecrated as a retirement for
holy men desirous of holding converse with their God.  No
shepherd’s pipe was to be heard within these precincts; no
huntsman’s profane feet to tread these silent regions,
which were to be dedicated solely to their Creator; no woman was
to ascend this mountain, nor violate by her allurements the
sacred repose of its inhabitants.

Such were the first institutions of the order as the inspired
Bishop of Grenoble delivered them to Bruno, who selecting a few
persons that, like himself, contemned the splendours of the world
and the charms of society, repaired with them to this spot; and,
in the darkest parts of the forests which shade the most gloomy
recesses of the mountains, founded the first convent of
Carthusians, long since destroyed.

Several years passed away, whilst Bruno was employed in
actions of the most exalted piety; and, the fame of his exemplary
conduct reaching Rome (where his friend had been lately invested
with the papal tiara), the whole conclave was desirous of seeing
him, and entreated Urban to invite him to Rome.  The request
of Christ’s vicegerent was not to be refused; and Bruno
quitted his beloved solitude, leaving some of his disciples
behind, who propagated his doctrines, and tended zealously the
infant order.

The pomp of the Roman court soon disgusted the rigid Bruno,
who had weaned himself entirely from worldly affections.

Being wholly intent on futurity, the bustle and tumults of a
busy metropolis became so irksome that he supplicated Urban for
leave to retire; and, having obtained it, left Rome, and
immediately seeking the wilds of Calabria, there sequestered
himself in a lonely hermitage, calmly expecting his last
moments.  Many are the miracles which he wrought and which
his canonized bones have since effected: angels (it is said),
hovered round him in his departing hour, and bore him on their
wings to heaven.  The different accounts of his translation
are almost endless; and as they are all nearly in the same style,
it will be needless to recite them.

I had scarcely finished taking extracts from the life and
writings of St. Bruno when the dinner appeared, consisting of
everything most delicate which a strict adherence to the rules of
meagre could allow.  The good fathers returned as usual with
the dessert, and served up an admirable dish of miracles, well
seasoned with the devil and prettily garnished with angels and
moonbeams.
[284]

Our conversation was interrupted, very agreeably, by the
sudden intrusion of the sun, which, escaping from the clouds,
shone in full splendour above the highest peak of the mountains,
and the vapours fleeting by degrees discovered the woods in all
the freshness of their verdure.  The pleasure I received
from seeing this new creation rising to view was very lively,
and, as the fathers assured me the humidity of their walks did
not often continue longer than the showers, I left my hall.

Crossing the court, I hastened out of the gates, and running
swiftly along a winding path on the side of the meadow, bordered
by the forests, enjoyed the charms of the prospect, inhaled the
perfume of the woodlands, and now turning towards the summits of
the precipices that encircled this sacred inclosure, admired the
glowing colours they borrowed from the sun, contrasted by the
dark hues of the forest.  Now, casting my eyes below, I
suffered them to roam from valley to valley, and from one stream
(beset with tall pines and tufted beech trees) to another.
The purity of the air in these exalted regions, and the lightness
of my own spirits, almost seized me with the idea of treading in
that element.

Not content with the distant beauties of the hanging rocks and
falling waters, I still kept running wildly along, with an
eagerness and rapidity that, to a sober spectator, would have
given me the appearance of one possessed, and with reason, for I
was affected with the scene to a degree I despair of
expressing.

Whilst I was continuing my course, pursued by a thousand
strange ideas, a father, who was returning from some distant
hermitage, stopped my career, and made signs for me to repose
myself on a bench erected under a neighbouring shed; and,
perceiving my agitation and disordered looks, fancied, I believe,
that one of the bears that lurk near the snows of the mountains
had alarmed me by his sudden appearance.

The good old man, expressing by his gestures that he wished me
to recover myself in quiet on the bench, hastened, with as much
alacrity as his age permitted, to a cottage adjoining the shed,
and returning in a few moments, presented me some water in a
wooden bowl, into which he let fall several drops of an elixir
composed of innumerable herbs, and having performed this deed of
charity, signified to me by a look, in which benevolence,
compassion, and perhaps some little remains of curiosity were
strongly painted, how sorry he was to be restrained by his vow of
silence from inquiring into the cause of my agitation, and giving
me farther assistance.  I answered also by signs, on purpose
to carry on the adventure, and suffered him to depart with all
his conjectures unsatisfied.

No sooner had I lost sight of the benevolent hermit, than I
started up, and pursued my path with my former agility, till I
came to the edge of a woody dell, that divided the meadow on
which I was running from the opposite promontory.  Here I
paused, and looking up at the cliffs, now but faintly illumined
by the sun, which had been some time sinking on our narrow
horizon, reflected that it would be madness to bewilder myself,
at so late an hour, in the mazes of the forest.  Being thus
determined, I abandoned with regret the idea of penetrating into
the lovely region before me, and contented myself for some
moments with marking the pale tints of the evening gradually
overspreading the cliffs, so lately flushed with the gleams of
the setting sun.

But my eyes were soon diverted from contemplating these
objects by a red light streaming over the northern sky, which
attracted my notice, as I sat on the brow of a sloping hill,
looking down a steep hollow vale, surrounded by the forests,
above which rose majestically the varied peaks and promontories
of the mountains.

The upland lawns, which hang at immense heights above the
vale, next caught my attention.  I was gazing alternately at
them and the valley, when a long succession of light misty
clouds, of strange fantastic shapes, issuing from a narrow gully
between the rocks, passed on, like a solemn procession, over the
hollow dale, midway between the stream that watered it below and
the summits of the cliffs on high.

The tranquillity of the region the verdure, of the lawn,
environed by girdles of flourishing wood, and the lowing of the
distant herds, filled me with the most pleasing sensations.
But when I lifted up my eyes to the towering cliffs, and beheld
the northern sky streaming with ruddy light, and the long
succession of misty forms hovering over the space beneath, they
became sublime and awful.  The dews which began to descend,
and the vapours which were rising from every dell, reminded me of
the lateness of the hour; and it was with great reluctance that I
turned from the scene which had so long engaged my contemplation,
and traversed slowly and silently the solitary meadows, over
which I had hurried with such eagerness an hour ago.

Hill appeared after hill, and hillock succeeded hillock, which
I had passed unnoticed before.  Sometimes I imagined myself
following a different path from that which had brought me to the
edge of the deep valley; another moment, descending into the
hollows between the hillocks that concealed the distant prospects
from my sight, I fancied I had entirely mistaken my route, and
expected every moment to be lost amongst the rude brakes and
tangled thickets that skirted the eminences around.

As the darkness increased, my situation became still more and
more forlorn.  I had almost abandoned the idea of reaching
the convent; and whenever I gained any swelling ground, looked
above, below, and on every side of me, in hopes of discovering
some glimmering lamp which might indicate a hermitage, whose
charitable possessor, I flattered myself, would direct me to the
monastery.

At length, after a tedious wandering along the hills, I found
myself, unexpectedly, under the convent walls; and, as I was
looking for the gate, the attendant lay brothers came out with
lights, in order to search for me.  Scarcely had I joined
them when the Coadjutor and the Secretary came forward, with the
kindest anxiety expressed their uneasiness at my long absence,
and conducted me to my apartment, where Mr. — was waiting,
with no small degree of impatience; but I found not a word had
been mentioned of my adventure with the hermit; so that, I
believe, he strictly kept his vow till the day when the
Carthusians are allowed to speak, and which happened after my
departure.

We had hardly supped before the gates of the convent were
shut, a circumstance which disconcerted me not a little, as the
full moon gleamed through the casements, and the stars, sparkling
above the forests of pines, invited me to leave my apartment
again, and to give myself up entirely to the spectacle they
offered.

The Coadjutor, perceiving that I was often looking earnestly
through the windows, guessed my wishes, and calling a lay
brother, ordered him to open the gates, and wait at them till my
return.  It was not long before I took advantage of this
permission, and escaping from the courts and cloisters of the
monastery, all hushed in death-like stillness, ascended a green
knoll, which several ancient pines strongly marked with their
shadows: there, leaning against one of their trunks, I lifted up
my eyes to the awful barrier of surrounding mountains, discovered
by the trembling silver light of the moon shooting directly on
the woods which fringed their acclivities.

The lawns, the vast woods, the steep descents, the precipices,
the torrents, lay all extended beneath, softened by a pale bluish
haze, that alleviated, in some measure, the stern prospect of the
rocky promontories above, wrapped in dark shadows.  The sky
was of the deepest azure; innumerable stars were distinguished
with unusual clearness from this elevation, many of which
twinkled behind the fir-trees edging the promontories.
White, grey, and darkish clouds came marching towards the moon,
that shone full against a range of cliffs, which lift themselves
far above the others.  The hoarse murmur of the torrent,
throwing itself from the distant wildernesses into the gloomy
vales, was mingled with the blast that blew from the
mountains.  It increased.  The forests began to wave,
black clouds rose from the north, and, as they fleeted along,
approached the moon, whose light they shortly extinguished.
A moment of darkness succeeded; the gust was chill and
melancholy; it swept along the desert, and then subsiding, the
vapours began to pass away, and the moon returned the grandeur of
the scene was renewed, and its imposing solemnity was increased
by her presence.  Inspiration was in every wind.

I followed some impulse which drove me to the summit of the
mountains before me; and there, casting a look on the whole
extent of wild woods and romantic precipices, thought of the days
of St. Bruno.  I eagerly contemplated every rock that
formerly might have met his eyes; drank of the spring which
tradition says he was wont to drink of; and ran to every pine
whose withered appearance bespoke a remote antiquity, and beneath
which, perhaps, the saint had reposed himself, when worn with
vigils, or possessed with the sacred spirit of his
institutions.

It was midnight: the convent bell tolled; for the most solemn
hour of prayer was arrived.  I cannot, nor would I, attempt
to unfold to you, in prose, half the strange things of which I
thought, and which I seemed to see, during this wild
excursion.  However, I owe to it the poetical humour in
which I composed the following lines, written immediately on my
return, in the album of the fathers, during the stillest watch of
the night:

ODE.

To orisons, the midnight
bell

Had toll’d each silent inmate from his cell;

The hour was come to muse or pray,

Or work mysterious rites that shun the day:

My steps some whis’pring influence led,

Up to yon pine-clad mountain’s gloomy head:

Hollow and deep the gust did blow,

And torrents dash’d into the vales below.

At length the toilsome height attain’d,

Quick fled the moon, and sudden stillness reign’d.

As fearful turn’d my searching eye,

Glanc’d near a shadowy form, and fleeted by;

Anon, before me full it stood:

A saintly figure, pale, in pensive mood.

Damp horror thrill’d me till he spoke,

And accents faint the charm bound silence broke:

“Long, trav’ller! ere this region
near,

Say, did not whisp’rings strange arrest thine ear?

My summons ’twas to bid thee come,

Where sole the friend of Nature loves to roam.

Ages long past, this drear abode

To solitude I sanctified, and God:

’Twas here, by love of Wisdom brought,

Her truest lore, Self-knowledge, first I sought;

Devoted here my worldly wealth,

To win my chosen sons immortal health.

Midst these dun woods, and mountains steep,

Midst the wild horrors of yon desert deep,

Midst yawning caverns, wat’ry dells,

Midst long, sequestered aisles, and peaceful cells,

No passions fell distract the mind,

To Nature, Silence, and Herself consign’d.

In these still mansions who shall bide,

’Tis mine, with Heaven’s appointment, to decide;

But, hither, I invite not all:

Some want the will to come, and more the call;

But all, mark well my parting voice!

Led, or by chance, necessity, or choice

(Ah! with our Genius dread to sport),

Sage lessons here may learn of high import.

Know!  Silence is the nurse of Truth;

Know!  Temperance long retards the flight of Youth

Learn here, how penitence and pray’r

Man’s fallen race for happier worlds prepare;

Learn mild demeanour, void of art,

And bear, amidst the world, the hermit’s heart;

Fix, trav’ller! deep this heaven-taught
lore:

Know Bruno brings it, and returns no more.”

(Half sighed, half smiled his long farewell),

He turn’d, and vanish’d in the bright’ning
dell.

My imagination was too much disturbed, and my spirits far too
active, to allow me any rest for some time, and I had not long
been quieted by sleep, when I was suddenly awakened by a furious
blast, that drove open my casement, and let in the roar of the
tempest, for the night was troubled.  In the intervals of
the storm, in those moments when the winds seemed to pause, the
faint sounds of the choir stole upon my ear; but were swallowed
up the next instant by the redoubled fury of the gust, which was
still increased by the roar of the waters.

I started from my bed, closed the casement, and composed
myself as well as I was able; but no sooner had the sunbeams
entered my window, than I arose, and gladly leaving my cell,
hastened to the same knoll where I had stood the night
before.  The storm was dissipated, and the pure morning air
delightfully refreshing; every tree, every shrub, glistened with
dew.  A gentle wind breathed upon the woods, and waved the
fir-trees on the cliffs, which, free from clouds, rose distinctly
into the clear blue sky.  I strayed from the knoll into the
valley between the steeps of wood and the turrets of the convent,
and passed the different buildings, destined for the manufacture
of the articles necessary to the fathers; for nothing is worn or
used within this inclosure which comes from the profane
world.

Traversing the meadows and a succession of little dells, where
I was so lately bewildered, I came to a bridge thrown over the
torrent, which I crossed; and here followed a slight path that
brought me to an eminence, covered with a hanging wood of
beach-trees feathered to the ground, from whence I looked down
the narrow pass towards Grenoble.  Perceiving a smoke to
arise from the groves which nodded over the eminence, I climbed
up a rocky steep, and, after struggling through a thicket of
shrubs, entered a smooth, sloping lawn, framed in by woody
precipices; at one extremity of which I discovered the cottage,
whose smoke had directed me to this sequestered spot; and, at the
other, a numerous group of cattle, lying under the shade of some
beech-trees, whilst several friars, with long beards and russet
garments, were employed in milking them.

The luxuriant foliage of the woods, clinging round the steeps
that skirted the lawn; its gay, sunny exposition; the groups of
sleek, dappled cows, and the odd employment of the friars, so
little consonant with their venerable beards, formed a
picturesque and certainly very singular spectacle.  I, who
had been accustomed to behold “milk-maids singing
blithe,” and tripping lightly along with their pails, was
not a little surprised at the silent gravity with which these
figures shifted their trivets from cow to cow; and it was curious
to see with what adroitness they performed their functions,
managing their long beards with a facility and cleanliness
equally admirable.

I watched all their movements for some time, concealed by the
trees, before I made myself visible; but no sooner did I appear
on the lawn, than one of the friars quitted his trivet, very
methodically set down his pail, and coming towards me with an
open, smiling countenance, desired me to refresh myself with some
bread and milk.  A second, observing what was going forward,
was resolved not to be exceeded in an hospitable act, and,
quitting his pail too, hastened into the woods whence he returned
in a few minutes with some strawberries, very neatly enveloped in
fresh leaves.  These hospitable, milking fathers, next
invited me to the cottage, whither I declined going, as I
preferred the shade of the beeches; so, throwing myself on the
dry aromatic herbage, I enjoyed the pastoral character of the
scene with all possible glee.

Not a cloud darkened the heavens; every object smiled;
innumerable gaudy flies glanced in the sunbeams that played in a
clear spring by the cottage; I saw with pleasure the sultry glow
of the distant cliffs and forests, whilst indolently reclined in
the shade, listening to the summer hum; one hour passed after
another neglected away, during my repose in this most delightful
of valleys.  The cattle were all slunk into the recesses of
the wood, and were drinking at the streams which flow along their
shades, before I could prevail on myself to quit the turf and the
beech trees.  Never shall I cease regretting the peaceful
moments I spent in Valombré, as never perhaps, were I even
to return to it, may so many circumstances unite to render it
pleasing.

When I returned unwillingly to the convent, the only topic on
which I could converse was the charms of Valombré; but
notwithstanding the indifference with which I now regarded the
prospects that surrounded the monastery, I could not disdain an
offer made by one of the friars, of conducting me to the summit
of the highest peak in the desert.

Pretty late in the afternoon I set out with my guide, and,
following his steps through many forests of pine, and wild
apertures among them, strewed with fragments, arrived at a
chapel, built on a mossy rock, and dedicated to St. Bruno.

Having once more drunk of the spring that issues from the rock
on which this edifice is raised, I moved forward, keeping my eyes
fixed on a lofty green mountain, whence rises a vast cliff,
spiring up to a surprising elevation; and which (owing to the
sun’s reflection on a transparent mist hovering around it)
was tinged with a pale visionary light.  This object was the
goal to which I aspired; and redoubling my activity, I made the
best of my way over rude ledges of rocks, and crumbled fragments
of the mountain interspersed with firs, till I came to the green
steeps I had surveyed at a distance.

These I ascended with some difficulty, and, leaving a few
scattered beech-trees behind, in full leaf, shortly bid adieu to
summer, and entered the regions of spring; for, as I approached
that part of the mountain next the summit, the trees, which I
found there rooted in the crevices, were but just beginning to
unfold their leaves, and every spot of the greensward was covered
with cowslips and violets.

After taking a few moments’ repose, my guide prepared to
clamber amongst the rocks, and I followed him with as much
alertness as I was able, till laying hold of the trunk of a
withered pine, we sprang upon a small level space, where I seated
myself, and beheld far beneath me the vast desert and dreary
solitudes, amongst which appeared, thinly scattered, the green
meadows and hanging lawns.  The eye next overlooking the
barrier of mountains, ranged through immense tracts of distant
countries; the plains where Lyons is situated; the woodlands and
lakes of Savoy; amongst which that of Bourget was near enough to
discover its beauties, all glowing with the warm haze of the
setting sun.

My situation was too dizzy to allow a long survey; so turning
my eyes from the terrific precipice, I gladly beheld an opening
in the rocks, through which we passed into a little irregular
glen of the smoothest greensward, closed in on one side by the
great peak, and on the others by a ridge of sharp pinnacles,
which crown the range of white cliffs I had so much admired the
night before, when brightened by the moon.

The singular situation of this romantic spot invited me to
remain in it till the sun was about to sink on the horizon:
during which time I visited every little cave delved in the
ridges of rock, and gathered large sprigs of the mezereon and
rhododendron in full bloom, which, with a surprising variety of
other plants, carpeted this lovely glen.  A luxuriant
vegetation,

“That on the green turf suck’d the
honey’d showers,

And purpled all the ground with vernal flow’rs.”

My guide, perceiving I was ready to mount still higher, told
me it would be in vain, as the beds of snow that lie eternally in
some fissures of the mountain, must necessarily impede my
progress; but, finding I was very unwilling to abandon the
enterprise, he showed me a few notches in the peak, by which we
might ascend, though not without danger.  This prospect
rather abated my courage, and the wind rising, drove several
thick clouds round the bottom of the peak, which increasing every
minute, shortly screened the green mountain and all the forest
from our sight.  A sea of vapours soon undulated beneath my
feet, and lightning began to flash from a dark angry cloud, that
hung over the valleys, and deluged them with storms, whilst I was
securely standing under the clear expanse of ether.

But the hour did not admit of my remaining long in this proud
station; so descending, I was soon obliged to pass through the
vapours, and, carefully following my guide (for a false step
might have caused my destruction), wound amongst the declivities,
till we left the peak behind, and just as we reached the green
mountain, which was moistened with the late storm, the clouds
fleeted and the evening recovered its serenity.

Leaving the chapel of St. Bruno on the right, we entered the
woods, and soon emerged from them into a large pasture, under the
grand amphitheatre of mountains, having a gentle ascent before
us, beyond which appeared the neat blue roofs and glittering
spires of the convent, where we arrived as the moon was beginning
to assume her empire.

I need not say I rested well after the interesting fatigues of
the day.  The next morning, early, I quitted my kind hosts
with great reluctance.  The Coadjutor and two other fathers
accompanied me to the outward gate, and there within the solemn
circle of the desert bestowed on me their benediction.

It seemed indeed to come from their hearts, nor would they
leave me till I was a hundred paces from the convent; and then,
laying their hands on their breasts, declared that if ever I was
disgusted with the world, here was an asylum.

I was in a melancholy mood when I traced back all the windings
of my road, and when I found myself beyond the last gate, in the
midst of the wide world again, it increased.

We returned to Les Echelles; from thence to Chamberry, and,
instead of going through Aix, passed by Amecy; but nothing in all
the route engaged my attention, nor had I any pleasing sensations
till I beheld the glassy lake of Geneva, and its lovely
environs.

I rejoiced then because I knew of a retirement on its banks
where I could sit and think of Valombré.

FOOTNOTES.

[110]
Hills in the neighbourhood of
Quang-Tong.

[127]
The Peries, inhabitants of
Ginnistan, live upon perfumes, etc., etc.  See
Richardson’s Dissertations.

[133]
Thisbe, a favourite greyhound
torn to pieces by a mad dog.

[140]
See the description of the
Grande Chartreuse.

[156]
The conduct of the emperor,
since the death of his mother, seems to be accomplishing this
prediction apace.

[170a]
It is reasonably conjectured
that the sea formerly washed the walls of Padua.

[170b]
T. Livius, L. i., c. i.

[170c]
Lib. v., c. iv., p. 5.

[171]
Called Roscani in Venetian, and
reduced to ashes for the glass manufactory at Murano.

[182]
A nephew of Bertoni, and worthy
of his uncle.

[214]
Mentioned by Dante in his
“Purgatorio.”

[240]
Mem. pour la Vie de Petrarque,
vol. i., p. 439.

[284]
Angela are frequently
represented, in legendary tales, as riding on the beams of the
moon.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DREAMS, WAKING THOUGHTS, AND
INCIDENTS***

***** This file should be named 7258-h.htm or 7258-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/7/2/5/7258

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.