The Project Gutenberg eBook of
Personal Poems II

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at
www.gutenberg.org
. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title
: Personal Poems II

Author
: John Greenleaf Whittier

Release date
: December 1, 2005 [eBook #9582]

Most recently updated: January 2, 2021

Language
: English

Credits
: This eBook was produced by David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSONAL POEMS II ***

This eBook was produced by David Widger

PERSONAL POEMS

BY

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER

CONTENTS:

THE CROSS
THE HERO
RANTOUL
WILLIAM FORSTER
TO CHARLES SUMNER
BURNS
TO GEORGE B. CHEEVER
TO JAMES T. FIELDS
THE MEMORY OF BURNS
IN REMEMBRANCE OF JOSEPH STURGER
BROWN OF OSSAWATOMIE
NAPLES
A MEMORIAL
BRYANT ON HIS BIRTHDAY
THOMAS STARR KING
LINES ON A FLY-LEAF
GEORGE L. STEARNS
GARIBALDI
TO LYDIA MARIA CHILD
THE SINGER
HOW MARY GREW
SUMNER
THIERS
FITZ-GREENE HALLECK
WILLIAM FRANCIS BARTLETT
BAYARD TAYLOR
OUR AUTOCRAT
WITHIN THE GATE
IN MEMORY: JAMES T. FIELDS
WILSON
THE POET AND THE CHILDREN
A WELCOME TO LOWELL
AN ARTIST OF THE BEAUTIFUL
MULFORD
TO A CAPE ANN SCHOONER
SAMUEL J. TILDEN

THE CROSS.

Richard Dillingham, a young member of the Society of Friends, died
in the Nashville penitentiary, where he was confined for the act of
aiding the escape of fugitive slaves.

"The cross, if rightly borne, shall be

No burden, but support to thee;"

So, moved of old time for our sake,

The holy monk of Kempen spake.

Thou brave and true one! upon whom

Was laid the cross of martyrdom,

How didst thou, in thy generous youth,

Bear witness to this blessed truth!

Thy cross of suffering and of shame

A staff within thy hands became,

In paths where faith alone could see

The Master's steps supporting thee.

Thine was the seed-time; God alone

Beholds the end of what is sown;

Beyond our vision, weak and dim,

The harvest-time is hid with Him.

Yet, unforgotten where it lies,

That seed of generous sacrifice,

Though seeming on the desert cast,

Shall rise with bloom and fruit at last.

1852.

THE HERO.

The hero of the incident related in this poem was Dr. Samuel Gridley
Howe, the well-known philanthropist, who when a young man volunteered
his aid in the Greek struggle for independence.

"Oh for a knight like Bayard,

Without reproach or fear;

My light glove on his casque of steel,

My love-knot on his spear!

"Oh for the white plume floating

Sad Zutphen's field above,—

The lion heart in battle,

The woman's heart in love!

"Oh that man once more were manly,

Woman's pride, and not her scorn:

That once more the pale young mother

Dared to boast `a man is born'!

"But, now life's slumberous current

No sun-bowed cascade wakes;

No tall, heroic manhood

The level dulness breaks.

"Oh for a knight like Bayard,

Without reproach or fear!

My light glove on his casque of steel,

My love-knot on his spear!"

Then I said, my own heart throbbing

To the time her proud pulse beat,

"Life hath its regal natures yet,

True, tender, brave, and sweet!

"Smile not, fair unbeliever!

One man, at least, I know,

Who might wear the crest of Bayard

Or Sidney's plume of snow.

"Once, when over purple mountains

Died away the Grecian sun,

And the far Cyllenian ranges

Paled and darkened, one by one,—

"Fell the Turk, a bolt of thunder,

Cleaving all the quiet sky,

And against his sharp steel lightnings

Stood the Suliote but to die.

"Woe for the weak and halting!

The crescent blazed behind

A curving line of sabres,

Like fire before the wind!

"Last to fly, and first to rally,

Rode he of whom I speak,

When, groaning in his bridle-path,

Sank down a wounded Greek.

"With the rich Albanian costume

Wet with many a ghastly stain,

Gazing on earth and sky as one

Who might not gaze again.

"He looked forward to the mountains,

Back on foes that never spare,

Then flung him from his saddle,

And placed the stranger there.

"'Allah! hu!' Through flashing sabres,

Through a stormy hail of lead,

The good Thessalian charger

Up the slopes of olives sped.

"Hot spurred the turbaned riders;

He almost felt their breath,

Where a mountain stream rolled darkly down

Between the hills and death.

"One brave and manful struggle,—

He gained the solid land,

And the cover of the mountains,

And the carbines of his band!"

"It was very great and noble,"

Said the moist-eyed listener then,

"But one brave deed makes no hero;

Tell me what he since hath been!"

"Still a brave and generous manhood,

Still an honor without stain,

In the prison of the Kaiser,

By the barricades of Seine.

"But dream not helm and harness

The sign of valor true;

Peace hath higher tests of manhood

Than battle ever knew.

"Wouldst know him now? Behold him,

The Cadmus of the blind,

Giving the dumb lip language,

The idiot-clay a mind.

"Walking his round of duty

Serenely day by day,

With the strong man's hand of labor

And childhood's heart of play.

"True as the knights of story,

Sir Lancelot and his peers,

Brave in his calm endurance

As they in tilt of spears.

"As waves in stillest waters,

As stars in noonday skies,

All that wakes to noble action

In his noon of calmness lies.

"Wherever outraged Nature

Asks word or action brave,

Wherever struggles labor,

Wherever groans a slave,—

"Wherever rise the peoples,

Wherever sinks a throne,

The throbbing heart of Freedom finds

An answer in his own.

"Knight of a better era,

Without reproach or fear!

Said I not well that Bayards

And Sidneys still are here?"

1853.

RANTOUL.

No more fitting inscription could be placed on the tombstone of

Robert Rantoul than this: "He died at his post in Congress, and his

last words were a protest in the name of Democracy against the

Fugitive-Slave Law."

One day, along the electric wire

His manly word for Freedom sped;

We came next morn: that tongue of fire

Said only, "He who spake is dead!"

Dead! while his voice was living yet,

In echoes round the pillared dome!

Dead! while his blotted page lay wet

With themes of state and loves of home!

Dead! in that crowning grace of time,

That triumph of life's zenith hour!

Dead! while we watched his manhood's prime

Break from the slow bud into flower!

Dead! he so great, and strong, and wise,

While the mean thousands yet drew breath;

How deepened, through that dread surprise,

The mystery and the awe of death!

From the high place whereon our votes

Had borne him, clear, calm, earnest, fell

His first words, like the prelude notes

Of some great anthem yet to swell.

We seemed to see our flag unfurled,

Our champion waiting in his place

For the last battle of the world,

The Armageddon of the race.

Through him we hoped to speak the word

Which wins the freedom of a land;

And lift, for human right, the sword

Which dropped from Hampden's dying hand.

For he had sat at Sidney's feet,

And walked with Pym and Vane apart;

And, through the centuries, felt the beat

Of Freedom's march in Cromwell's heart.

He knew the paths the worthies held,

Where England's best and wisest trod;

And, lingering, drank the springs that welled

Beneath the touch of Milton's rod.

No wild enthusiast of the right,

Self-poised and clear, he showed alway

The coolness of his northern night,

The ripe repose of autumn's day.

His steps were slow, yet forward still

He pressed where others paused or failed;

The calm star clomb with constant will,

The restless meteor flashed and paled.

Skilled in its subtlest wile, he knew

And owned the higher ends of Law;

Still rose majestic on his view

The awful Shape the schoolman saw.

Her home the heart of God; her voice

The choral harmonies whereby

The stars, through all their spheres, rejoice,

The rhythmic rule of earth and sky.

We saw his great powers misapplied

To poor ambitions; yet, through all,

We saw him take the weaker side,

And right the wronged, and free the thrall.

Now, looking o'er the frozen North,

For one like him in word and act,

To call her old, free spirit forth,

And give her faith the life of fact,—

To break her party bonds of shame,

And labor with the zeal of him

To make the Democratic name

Of Liberty the synonyme,—

We sweep the land from hill to strand,

We seek the strong, the wise, the brave,

And, sad of heart, return to stand

In silence by a new-made grave!

There, where his breezy hills of home

Look out upon his sail-white seas,

The sounds of winds and waters come,

And shape themselves to words like these.

"Why, murmuring, mourn that he, whose power

Was lent to Party over-long,

Heard the still whisper at the hour

He set his foot on Party wrong?

"The human life that closed so well

No lapse of folly now can stain

The lips whence Freedom's protest fell

No meaner thought can now profane.

"Mightier than living voice his grave

That lofty protest utters o'er;

Through roaring wind and smiting wave

It speaks his hate of wrong once more.

"Men of the North! your weak regret

Is wasted here; arise and pay

To freedom and to him your debt,

By following where he led the way!"

1853.

WILLIAM FORSTER.

William Forster, of Norwich, England, died in East Tennessee, in
the 1st month, 1854, while engaged in presenting to the governors
of the States of this Union the address of his religious society on
the evils of slavery. He was the relative and coadjutor of the
Buxtons, Gurneys, and Frys; and his whole life, extending al-most
to threescore and ten years, was a pore and beautiful example of
Christian benevolence. He had travelled over Europe, and visited
most of its sovereigns, to plead against the slave-trade and
slavery; and had twice before made visits to this country, under
impressions of religious duty. He was the father of the Right Hon.
William Edward Forster. He visited my father's house in Haverhill
during his first tour in the United States.

The years are many since his hand

Was laid upon my head,

Too weak and young to understand

The serious words he said.

Yet often now the good man's look

Before me seems to swim,

As if some inward feeling took

The outward guise of him.

As if, in passion's heated war,

Or near temptation's charm,

Through him the low-voiced monitor

Forewarned me of the harm.

Stranger and pilgrim! from that day

Of meeting, first and last,

Wherever Duty's pathway lay,

His reverent steps have passed.

The poor to feed, the lost to seek,

To proffer life to death,

Hope to the erring,—to the weak

The strength of his own faith.

To plead the captive's right; remove

The sting of hate from Law;

And soften in the fire of love

The hardened steel of War.

He walked the dark world, in the mild,

Still guidance of the Light;

In tearful tenderness a child,

A strong man in the right.

From what great perils, on his way,

He found, in prayer, release;

Through what abysmal shadows lay

His pathway unto peace,

God knoweth : we could only see

The tranquil strength he gained;

The bondage lost in liberty,

The fear in love unfeigned.

And I,—my youthful fancies grown

The habit of the man,

Whose field of life by angels sown

The wilding vines o'erran,—

Low bowed in silent gratitude,

My manhood's heart enjoys

That reverence for the pure and good

Which blessed the dreaming boy's.

Still shines the light of holy lives

Like star-beams over doubt;

Each sainted memory, Christlike, drives

Some dark possession out.

O friend! O brother I not in vain

Thy life so calm and true,

The silver dropping of the rain,

The fall of summer dew!

How many burdened hearts have prayed

Their lives like thine might be

But more shall pray henceforth for aid

To lay them down like thee.

With weary hand, yet steadfast will,

In old age as in youth,

Thy Master found thee sowing still

The good seed of His truth.

As on thy task-field closed the day

In golden-skied decline,

His angel met thee on the way,

And lent his arm to thine.

Thy latest care for man,—thy last

Of earthly thought a prayer,—

Oh, who thy mantle, backward cast,

Is worthy now to wear?

Methinks the mound which marks thy bed

Might bless our land and save,

As rose, of old, to life the dead

Who touched the prophet's grave

1854.

TO CHARLES SUMNER.

If I have seemed more prompt to censure wrong

Than praise the right; if seldom to thine ear

My voice hath mingled with the exultant cheer

Borne upon all our Northern winds along;

If I have failed to join the fickle throng

In wide-eyed wonder, that thou standest strong

In victory, surprised in thee to find

Brougham's scathing power with Canning's grace combined;

That he, for whom the ninefold Muses sang,

From their twined arms a giant athlete sprang,

Barbing the arrows of his native tongue

With the spent shafts Latona's archer flung,

To smite the Python of our land and time,

Fell as the monster born of Crissa's slime,

Like the blind bard who in Castalian springs

Tempered the steel that clove the crest of kings,

And on the shrine of England's freedom laid

The gifts of Cumve and of Delphi's' shade,—

Small need hast thou of words of praise from me.

Thou knowest my heart, dear friend, and well canst guess

That, even though silent, I have not the less

Rejoiced to see thy actual life agree

With the large future which I shaped for thee,

When, years ago, beside the summer sea,

White in the moon, we saw the long waves fall

Baffled and broken from the rocky wall,

That, to the menace of the brawling flood,

Opposed alone its massive quietude,

Calm as a fate; with not a leaf nor vine

Nor birch-spray trembling in the still moonshine,

Crowning it like God's peace. I sometimes think

That night-scene by the sea prophetical,

(For Nature speaks in symbols and in signs,

And through her pictures human fate divines),

That rock, wherefrom we saw the billows sink

In murmuring rout, uprising clear and tall

In the white light of heaven, the type of one

Who, momently by Error's host assailed,

Stands strong as Truth, in greaves of granite mailed;

And, tranquil-fronted, listening over all

The tumult, hears the angels say, Well done!

1854.

BURNS

ON RECEIVING A SPRIG OF HEATHER IN BLOSSOM.

No more these simple flowers belong

To Scottish maid and lover;

Sown in the common soil of song,

They bloom the wide world over.

In smiles and tears, in sun and showers,

The minstrel and the heather,

The deathless singer and the flowers

He sang of live together.

Wild heather-bells and Robert Burns

The moorland flower and peasant!

How, at their mention, memory turns

Her pages old and pleasant!

The gray sky wears again its gold

And purple of adorning,

And manhood's noonday shadows hold

The dews of boyhood's morning.

The dews that washed the dust and soil

From off the wings of pleasure,

The sky, that flecked the, ground of toil

With golden threads of leisure.

I call to mind the summer day,

The early harvest mowing,

The sky with sun and clouds at play,

And flowers with breezes blowing.

I hear the blackbird in the corn,

The locust in the haying;

And, like the fabled hunter's horn,

Old tunes my heart is playing.

How oft that day, with fond delay,

I sought the maple's shadow,

And sang with Burns the hours away,

Forgetful of the meadow.

Bees hummed, birds twittered, overhead

I heard the squirrels leaping,

The good dog listened while I read,

And wagged his tail in keeping.

I watched him while in sportive mood

I read "
The Twa Dogs
" story,

And half believed he understood

The poet's allegory.

Sweet day, sweet songs! The golden hours

Grew brighter for that singing,

From brook and bird and meadow flowers

A dearer welcome bringing.

New light on home-seen Nature beamed,

New glory over Woman;

And daily life and duty seemed

No longer poor and common.

I woke to find the simple truth

Of fact and feeling better

Than all the dreams that held my youth

A still repining debtor,

That Nature gives her handmaid, Art,

The themes of sweet discoursing;

The tender idyls of the heart

In every tongue rehearsing.

Why dream of lands of gold and pearl,

Of loving knight and lady,

When farmer boy and barefoot girl

Were wandering there already?

I saw through all familiar things

The romance underlying;

The joys and griefs that plume the wings

Of Fancy skyward flying.

I saw the same blithe day return,

The same sweet fall of even,

That rose on wooded Craigie-burn,

And sank on crystal Devon.

I matched with Scotland's heathery hills

The sweetbrier and the clover;

With Ayr and Doon, my native rills,

Their wood-hymns chanting over.

O'er rank and pomp, as he had seen,

I saw the Man uprising;

No longer common or unclean,

The child of God's baptizing!

With clearer eyes I saw the worth

Of life among the lowly;

The Bible at his Cotter's hearth

Had made my own more holy.

And if at times an evil strain,

To lawless love appealing,

Broke in upon the sweet refrain

Of pure and healthful feeling,

It died upon the eye and ear,

No inward answer gaining;

No heart had I to see or hear

The discord and the staining.

Let those who never erred forget

His worth, in vain bewailings;

Sweet Soul of Song! I own my debt

Uncancelled by his failings!

Lament who will the ribald line

Which tells his lapse from duty,

How kissed the maddening lips of wine

Or wanton ones of beauty;

But think, while falls that shade between

The erring one and Heaven,

That he who loved like Magdalen,

Like her may be forgiven.

Not his the song whose thunderous chime

Eternal echoes render;

The mournful Tuscan's haunted rhyme,

And Milton's starry splendor!

But who his human heart has laid

To Nature's bosom nearer?

Who sweetened toil like him, or paid

To love a tribute dearer?

Through all his tuneful art, how strong

The human feeling gushes

The very moonlight of his song

Is warm with smiles and blushes!

Give lettered pomp to teeth of Time,

So "Bonnie Doon" but tarry;

Blot out the Epic's stately rhyme,

But spare his Highland Mary!

1854.

TO GEORGE B. CHEEVER

So spake Esaias: so, in words of flame,

Tekoa's prophet-herdsman smote with blame

The traffickers in men, and put to shame,

All earth and heaven before,

The sacerdotal robbers of the poor.

All the dread Scripture lives for thee again,

To smite like lightning on the hands profane

Lifted to bless the slave-whip and the chain.

Once more the old Hebrew tongue

Bends with the shafts of God a bow new-strung!

Take up the mantle which the prophets wore;

Warn with their warnings, show the Christ once more

Bound, scourged, and crucified in His blameless poor;

And shake above our land

The unquenched bolts that blazed in Hosea's hand!

Not vainly shalt thou cast upon our years

The solemn burdens of the Orient seers,

And smite with truth a guilty nation's ears.

Mightier was Luther's word

Than Seckingen's mailed arm or Hutton's sword!

1858.

TO JAMES T. FIELDS

ON A BLANK LEAF OF "POEMS PRINTED, NOT PUBLISHED."

Well thought! who would not rather hear

The songs to Love and Friendship sung

Than those which move the stranger's tongue,

And feed his unselected ear?

Our social joys are more than fame;

Life withers in the public look.

Why mount the pillory of a book,

Or barter comfort for a name?

Who in a house of glass would dwell,

With curious eyes at every pane?

To ring him in and out again,

Who wants the public crier's bell?

To see the angel in one's way,

Who wants to play the ass's part,—

Bear on his back the wizard Art,

And in his service speak or bray?

And who his manly locks would shave,

And quench the eyes of common sense,

To share the noisy recompense

That mocked the shorn and blinded slave?

The heart has needs beyond the head,

And, starving in the plenitude

Of strange gifts, craves its common food,—

Our human nature's daily bread.

We are but men: no gods are we,

To sit in mid-heaven, cold and bleak,

Each separate, on his painful peak,

Thin-cloaked in self-complacency.

Better his lot whose axe is swung

In Wartburg woods, or that poor girl's

Who by the him her spindle whirls

And sings the songs that Luther sung,

Than his who, old, and cold, and vain,

At Weimar sat, a demigod,

And bowed with Jove's imperial nod

His votaries in and out again!

Ply, Vanity, thy winged feet!

Ambition, hew thy rocky stair!

Who envies him who feeds on air

The icy splendor of his seat?

I see your Alps, above me, cut

The dark, cold sky; and dim and lone

I see ye sitting,—stone on stone,—

With human senses dulled and shut.

I could not reach you, if I would,

Nor sit among your cloudy shapes;

And (spare the fable of the grapes

And fox) I would not if I could.

Keep to your lofty pedestals!

The safer plain below I choose

Who never wins can rarely lose,

Who never climbs as rarely falls.

Let such as love the eagle's scream

Divide with him his home of ice

For me shall gentler notes suffice,—

The valley-song of bird and stream;

The pastoral bleat, the drone of bees,

The flail-beat chiming far away,

The cattle-low, at shut of day,

The voice of God in leaf and breeze;

Then lend thy hand, my wiser friend,

And help me to the vales below,

(In truth, I have not far to go,)

Where sweet with flowers the fields extend.

1858.

THE MEMORY OF BURNS.

Read at the Boston celebration of the hundredth anniversary of the
birth of Robert Burns, 25th 1st mo., 1859. In my absence these
lines were read by Ralph Waldo Emerson.

How sweetly come the holy psalms

From saints and martyrs down,

The waving of triumphal palms

Above the thorny crown

The choral praise, the chanted prayers

From harps by angels strung,

The hunted Cameron's mountain airs,

The hymns that Luther sung!

Yet, jarring not the heavenly notes,

The sounds of earth are heard,

As through the open minster floats

The song of breeze and bird

Not less the wonder of the sky

That daisies bloom below;

The brook sings on, though loud and high

The cloudy organs blow!

And, if the tender ear be jarred

That, haply, hears by turns

The saintly harp of Olney's bard,

The pastoral pipe of Burns,

No discord mars His perfect plan

Who gave them both a tongue;

For he who sings the love of man

The love of God hath sung!

To-day be every fault forgiven

Of him in whom we joy

We take, with thanks, the gold of Heaven

And leave the earth's alloy.

Be ours his music as of spring,

His sweetness as of flowers,

The songs the bard himself might sing

In holier ears than ours.

Sweet airs of love and home, the hum

Of household melodies,

Come singing, as the robins come

To sing in door-yard trees.

And, heart to heart, two nations lean,

No rival wreaths to twine,

But blending in eternal green

The holly and the pine!

IN REMEMBRANCE OF JOSEPH STURGE.

In the fair land o'erwatched by Ischia's mountains,

Across the charmed bay

Whose blue waves keep with Capri's silver fountains

Perpetual holiday,

A king lies dead, his wafer duly eaten,

His gold-bought masses given;

And Rome's great altar smokes with gums to sweeten

Her foulest gift to Heaven.

And while all Naples thrills with mute thanksgiving,

The court of England's queen

For the dead monster so abhorred while living

In mourning garb is seen.

With a true sorrow God rebukes that feigning;

By lone Edgbaston's side

Stands a great city in the sky's sad raining,

Bareheaded and wet-eyed!

Silent for once the restless hive of labor,

Save the low funeral tread,

Or voice of craftsman whispering to his neighbor

The good deeds of the dead.

For him no minster's chant of the immortals

Rose from the lips of sin;

No mitred priest swung back the heavenly portals

To let the white soul in.

But Age and Sickness framed their tearful faces

In the low hovel's door,

And prayers went up from all the dark by-places

And Ghettos of the poor.

The pallid toiler and the negro chattel,

The vagrant of the street,

The human dice wherewith in games of battle

The lords of earth compete,

Touched with a grief that needs no outward draping,

All swelled the long lament,

Of grateful hearts, instead of marble, shaping

His viewless monument!

For never yet, with ritual pomp and splendor,

In the long heretofore,

A heart more loyal, warm, and true, and tender,

Has England's turf closed o'er.

And if there fell from out her grand old steeples

No crash of brazen wail,

The murmurous woe of kindreds, tongues, and peoples

Swept in on every gale.

It came from Holstein's birchen-belted meadows,

And from the tropic calms

Of Indian islands in the sunlit shadows

Of Occidental palms;

From the locked roadsteads of the Bothniaii peasants,

And harbors of the Finn,

Where war's worn victims saw his gentle presence

Come sailing, Christ-like, in,

To seek the lost, to build the old waste places,

To link the hostile shores

Of severing seas, and sow with England's daisies

The moss of Finland's moors.

Thanks for the good man's beautiful example,

Who in the vilest saw

Some sacred crypt or altar of a temple

Still vocal with God's law;

And heard with tender ear the spirit sighing

As from its prison cell,

Praying for pity, like the mournful crying

Of Jonah out of hell.

Not his the golden pen's or lip's persuasion,

But a fine sense of right,

And Truth's directness, meeting each occasion

Straight as a line of light.

His faith and works, like streams that intermingle,

In the same channel ran

The crystal clearness of an eye kept single

Shamed all the frauds of man.

The very gentlest of all human natures

He joined to courage strong,

And love outreaching unto all God's creatures

With sturdy hate of wrong.

Tender as woman, manliness and meekness

In him were so allied

That they who judged him by his strength or weakness

Saw but a single side.

Men failed, betrayed him, but his zeal seemed nourished

By failure and by fall;

Still a large faith in human-kind he cherished,

And in God's love for all.

And now he rests: his greatness and his sweetness

No more shall seem at strife,

And death has moulded into calm completeness

The statue of his life.

Where the dews glisten and the songbirds warble,

His dust to dust is laid,

In Nature's keeping, with no pomp of marble

To shame his modest shade.

The forges glow, the hammers all are ringing;

Beneath its smoky vale,

Hard by, the city of his love is swinging

Its clamorous iron flail.

But round his grave are quietude and beauty,

And the sweet heaven above,—

The fitting symbols of a life of duty

Transfigured into love!

1859.

BROWN OF OSSAWATOMIE

John Brown of Ossawatomie spake on his dying day:

"I will not have to shrive my soul a priest in Slavery's pay.

But let some poor slave-mother whom I have striven to free,

With her children, from the gallows-stair put up a prayer for me!"

John Brown of Ossawatomie, they led him out to die;

And lo! a poor slave-mother with her little child pressed nigh.

Then the bold, blue eye grew tender, and the old harsh face grew mild,

As he stooped between the jeering ranks and kissed the negro's child.

The shadows of his stormy life that moment fell apart;

And they who blamed the bloody hand forgave the loving heart.

That kiss from all its guilty means redeemed the good intent,

And round the grisly fighter's hair the martyr's aureole bent!

Perish with him the folly that seeks through evil good

Long live the generous purpose unstained with human blood!

Not the raid of midnight terror, but the thought which underlies;

Not the borderer's pride of daring, but the Christian's sacrifice.

Nevermore may yon Blue Ridges the Northern rifle hear,

Nor see the light of blazing homes flash on the negro's spear.

But let the free-winged angel Truth their guarded passes scale,

To teach that right is more than might, and justice more than mail!

So vainly shall Virginia set her battle in array;

In vain her trampling squadrons knead the winter snow with clay.

She may strike the pouncing eagle, but she dares not harm the dove;

And every gate she bars to Hate shall open wide to Love!

1859.

NAPLES

INSCRIBED TO ROBERT C. WATERSTON, OF BOSTON.

Helen Waterston died at Naples in her eighteenth year, and lies
buried in the Protestant cemetery there. The stone over her grave
bears the lines,

Fold her, O Father, in Thine arms,

And let her henceforth be

A messenger of love between

Our human hearts and Thee.

I give thee joy!—I know to thee

The dearest spot on earth must be

Where sleeps thy loved one by the summer sea;

Where, near her sweetest poet's tomb,

The land of Virgil gave thee room

To lay thy flower with her perpetual bloom.

I know that when the sky shut down

Behind thee on the gleaming town,

On Baiae's baths and Posilippo's crown;

And, through thy tears, the mocking day

Burned Ischia's mountain lines away,

And Capri melted in its sunny bay;

Through thy great farewell sorrow shot

The sharp pang of a bitter thought

That slaves must tread around that holy spot.

Thou knewest not the land was blest

In giving thy beloved rest,

Holding the fond hope closer to her breast,

That every sweet and saintly grave

Was freedom's prophecy, and gave

The pledge of Heaven to sanctify and save.

That pledge is answered. To thy ear

The unchained city sends its cheer,

And, tuned to joy, the muffled bells of fear

Ring Victor in. The land sits free

And happy by the summer sea,

And Bourbon Naples now is Italy!

She smiles above her broken chain

The languid smile that follows pain,

Stretching her cramped limbs to the sun again.

Oh, joy for all, who hear her call

From gray Camaldoli's convent-wall

And Elmo's towers to freedom's carnival!

A new life breathes among her vines

And olives, like the breath of pines

Blown downward from the breezy Apennines.

Lean, O my friend, to meet that breath,

Rejoice as one who witnesseth

Beauty from ashes rise, and life from death!

Thy sorrow shall no more be pain,

Its tears shall fall in sunlit rain,

Writing the grave with flowers: "Arisen again!"

1860.

A MEMORIAL

Moses Austin Cartland, a dear friend and relation, who led a

faithful life as a teacher and died in the summer of 1863.

Oh, thicker, deeper, darker growing,

The solemn vista to the tomb

Must know henceforth another shadow,

And give another cypress room.

In love surpassing that of brothers,

We walked, O friend, from childhood's day;

And, looking back o'er fifty summers,

Our footprints track a common way.

One in our faith, and one our longing

To make the world within our reach

Somewhat the better for our living,

And gladder for our human speech.

Thou heard'st with me the far-off voices,

The old beguiling song of fame,

But life to thee was warm and present,

And love was better than a name.

To homely joys and loves and friendships

Thy genial nature fondly clung;

And so the shadow on the dial

Ran back and left thee always young.

And who could blame the generous weakness

Which, only to thyself unjust,

So overprized the worth of others,

And dwarfed thy own with self-distrust?

All hearts grew warmer in the presence

Of one who, seeking not his own,

Gave freely for the love of giving,

Nor reaped for self the harvest sown.

Thy greeting smile was pledge and prelude

Of generous deeds and kindly words;

In thy large heart were fair guest-chambers,

Open to sunrise and the birds;

The task was thine to mould and fashion

Life's plastic newness into grace

To make the boyish heart heroic,

And light with thought the maiden's face.

O'er all the land, in town and prairie,

With bended heads of mourning, stand

The living forms that owe their beauty

And fitness to thy shaping hand.

Thy call has come in ripened manhood,

The noonday calm of heart and mind,

While I, who dreamed of thy remaining

To mourn me, linger still behind,

Live on, to own, with self-upbraiding,

A debt of love still due from me,—

The vain remembrance of occasions,

Forever lost, of serving thee.

It was not mine among thy kindred

To join the silent funeral prayers,

But all that long sad day of summer

My tears of mourning dropped with theirs.

All day the sea-waves sobbed with sorrow,

The birds forgot their merry trills

All day I heard the pines lamenting

With thine upon thy homestead hills.

Green be those hillside pines forever,

And green the meadowy lowlands be,

And green the old memorial beeches,

Name-carven in the woods of Lee.

Still let them greet thy life companions

Who thither turn their pilgrim feet,

In every mossy line recalling

A tender memory sadly sweet.

O friend! if thought and sense avail not

To know thee henceforth as thou art,

That all is well with thee forever

I trust the instincts of my heart.

Thine be the quiet habitations,

Thine the green pastures, blossom-sown,

And smiles of saintly recognition,

As sweet and tender as thy own.

Thou com'st not from the hush and shadow

To meet us, but to thee we come,

With thee we never can be strangers,

And where thou art must still be home.

1863.

BRYANT ON HIS BIRTHDAY

Mr. Bryant's seventieth birthday, November 3, 1864, was celebrated

by a festival to which these verses were sent.

We praise not now the poet's art,

The rounded beauty of his song;

Who weighs him from his life apart

Must do his nobler nature wrong.

Not for the eye, familiar grown

With charms to common sight denied,

The marvellous gift he shares alone

With him who walked on Rydal-side;

Not for rapt hymn nor woodland lay,

Too grave for smiles, too sweet for tears;

We speak his praise who wears to-day

The glory of his seventy years.

When Peace brings Freedom in her train,

Let happy lips his songs rehearse;

His life is now his noblest strain,

His manhood better than his verse!

Thank God! his hand on Nature's keys

Its cunning keeps at life's full span;

But, dimmed and dwarfed, in times like these,

The poet seems beside the man!

So be it! let the garlands die,

The singer's wreath, the painter's meed,

Let our names perish, if thereby

Our country may be saved and freed!

1864.

THOMAS STARR KING

Published originally as a prelude to the posthumous volume of

selections edited by Richard Frothingham.

The great work laid upon his twoscore years

Is done, and well done. If we drop our tears,

Who loved him as few men were ever loved,

We mourn no blighted hope nor broken plan

With him whose life stands rounded and approved

In the full growth and stature of a man.

Mingle, O bells, along the Western slope,

With your deep toll a sound of faith and hope!

Wave cheerily still, O banner, half-way down,

From thousand-masted bay and steepled town!

Let the strong organ with its loftiest swell

Lift the proud sorrow of the land, and tell

That the brave sower saw his ripened grain.

O East and West! O morn and sunset twain

No more forever!—has he lived in vain

Who, priest of Freedom, made ye one, and told

Your bridal service from his lips of gold?

1864.

LINES ON A FLY-LEAF.

I need not ask thee, for my sake,

To read a book which well may make

Its way by native force of wit

Without my manual sign to it.

Its piquant writer needs from me

No gravely masculine guaranty,

And well might laugh her merriest laugh

At broken spears in her behalf;

Yet, spite of all the critics tell,

I frankly own I like her well.

It may be that she wields a pen

Too sharply nibbed for thin-skinned men,

That her keen arrows search and try

The armor joints of dignity,

And, though alone for error meant,

Sing through the air irreverent.

I blame her not, the young athlete

Who plants her woman's tiny feet,

And dares the chances of debate

Where bearded men might hesitate,

Who, deeply earnest, seeing well

The ludicrous and laughable,

Mingling in eloquent excess

Her anger and her tenderness,

And, chiding with a half-caress,

Strives, less for her own sex than ours,

With principalities and powers,

And points us upward to the clear

Sunned heights of her new atmosphere.

Heaven mend her faults!—I will not pause

To weigh and doubt and peck at flaws,

Or waste my pity when some fool

Provokes her measureless ridicule.

Strong-minded is she? Better so

Than dulness set for sale or show,

A household folly, capped and belled

In fashion's dance of puppets held,

Or poor pretence of womanhood,

Whose formal, flavorless platitude

Is warranted from all offence

Of robust meaning's violence.

Give me the wine of thought whose head

Sparkles along the page I read,—

Electric words in which I find

The tonic of the northwest wind;

The wisdom which itself allies

To sweet and pure humanities,

Where scorn of meanness, hate of wrong,

Are underlaid by love as strong;

The genial play of mirth that lights

Grave themes of thought, as when, on nights

Of summer-time, the harmless blaze

Of thunderless heat-lightning plays,

And tree and hill-top resting dim

And doubtful on the sky's vague rim,

Touched by that soft and lambent gleam,

Start sharply outlined from their dream.

Talk not to me of woman's sphere,

Nor point with Scripture texts a sneer,

Nor wrong the manliest saint of all

By doubt, if he were here, that Paul

Would own the heroines who have lent

Grace to truth's stern arbitrament,

Foregone the praise to woman sweet,

And cast their crowns at Duty's feet;

Like her, who by her strong Appeal

Made Fashion weep and Mammon feel,

Who, earliest summoned to withstand

The color-madness of the land,

Counted her life-long losses gain,

And made her own her sisters' pain;

Or her who, in her greenwood shade,

Heard the sharp call that Freedom made,

And, answering, struck from Sappho's lyre

Of love the Tyrtman carmen's fire

Or that young girl,—Domremy's maid

Revived a nobler cause to aid,—

Shaking from warning finger-tips

The doom of her apocalypse;

Or her, who world-wide entrance gave

To the log-cabin of the slave,

Made all his want and sorrow known,

And all earth's languages his own.

1866.

GEORGE L. STEARNS

No man rendered greater service to the cause of freedom than Major

Stearns in the great struggle between invading slave-holders and

the free settlers of Kansas.

He has done the work of a true man,—

Crown him, honor him, love him.

Weep, over him, tears of woman,

Stoop manliest brows above him!

O dusky mothers and daughters,

Vigils of mourning keep for him!

Up in the mountains, and down by the waters,

Lift up your voices and weep for him,

For the warmest of hearts is frozen,

The freest of hands is still;

And the gap in our picked and chosen

The long years may not fill.

No duty could overtask him,

No need his will outrun;

Or ever our lips could ask him,

His hands the work had done.

He forgot his own soul for others,

Himself to his neighbor lending;

He found the Lord in his suffering brothers,

And not in the clouds descending.

So the bed was sweet to die on,

Whence he saw the doors wide swung

Against whose bolted iron

The strength of his life was flung.

And he saw ere his eye was darkened

The sheaves of the harvest-bringing,

And knew while his ear yet hearkened

The voice of the reapers singing.

Ah, well! The world is discreet;

There are plenty to pause and wait;

But here was a man who set his feet

Sometimes in advance of fate;

Plucked off the old bark when the inner

Was slow to renew it,

And put to the Lord's work the sinner

When saints failed to do it.

Never rode to the wrong's redressing

A worthier paladin.

Shall he not hear the blessing,

"Good and faithful, enter in!"

1867

GARIBALDI

In trance and dream of old, God's prophet saw

The casting down of thrones. Thou, watching lone

The hot Sardinian coast-line, hazy-hilled,

Where, fringing round Caprera's rocky zone

With foam, the slow waves gather and withdraw,

Behold'st the vision of the seer fulfilled,

And hear'st the sea-winds burdened with a sound

Of falling chains, as, one by one, unbound,

The nations lift their right hands up and swear

Their oath of freedom. From the chalk-white wall

Of England, from the black Carpathian range,

Along the Danube and the Theiss, through all

The passes of the Spanish Pyrenees,

And from the Seine's thronged banks, a murmur strange

And glad floats to thee o'er thy summer seas

On the salt wind that stirs thy whitening hair,—

The song of freedom's bloodless victories!

Rejoice, O Garibaldi! Though thy sword

Failed at Rome's gates, and blood seemed vainly poured

Where, in Christ's name, the crowned infidel

Of France wrought murder with the arms of hell

On that sad mountain slope whose ghostly dead,

Unmindful of the gray exorcist's ban,

Walk, unappeased, the chambered Vatican,

And draw the curtains of Napoleon's bed!

God's providence is not blind, but, full of eyes,

It searches all the refuges of lies;

And in His time and way, the accursed things

Before whose evil feet thy battle-gage

Has clashed defiance from hot youth to age

Shall perish. All men shall be priests and kings,

One royal brotherhood, one church made free

By love, which is the law of liberty

1869.

TO LYDIA MARIA CHILD,

ON READING HER POEM IN "THE STANDARD."

Mrs. Child wrote her lines, beginning, "Again the trees are clothed
in vernal green," May 24, 1859, on the first anniversary of Ellis
Gray Loring's death, but did not publish them for some years
afterward, when I first read them, or I could not have made the
reference which I did to the extinction of slavery.

The sweet spring day is glad with music,

But through it sounds a sadder strain;

The worthiest of our narrowing circle

Sings Loring's dirges o'er again.

O woman greatly loved! I join thee

In tender memories of our friend;

With thee across the awful spaces

The greeting of a soul I send!

What cheer hath he? How is it with him?

Where lingers he this weary while?

Over what pleasant fields of Heaven

Dawns the sweet sunrise of his smile?

Does he not know our feet are treading

The earth hard down on Slavery's grave?

That, in our crowning exultations,

We miss the charm his presence gave?

Why on this spring air comes no whisper

From him to tell us all is well?

Why to our flower-time comes no token

Of lily and of asphodel?

I feel the unutterable longing,

Thy hunger of the heart is mine;

I reach and grope for hands in darkness,

My ear grows sharp for voice or sign.

Still on the lips of all we question

The finger of God's silence lies;

Will the lost hands in ours be folded?

Will the shut eyelids ever rise?

O friend! no proof beyond this yearning,

This outreach of our hearts, we need;

God will not mock the hope He giveth,

No love He prompts shall vainly plead.

Then let us stretch our hands in darkness,

And call our loved ones o'er and o'er;

Some day their arms shall close about us,

And the old voices speak once more.

No dreary splendors wait our coming

Where rapt ghost sits from ghost apart;

Homeward we go to Heaven's thanksgiving,

The harvest-gathering of the heart.

1870.

THE SINGER.

This poem was written on the death of Alice Cary. Her sister

Phoebe, heart-broken by her loss, followed soon after. Noble and

richly gifted, lovely in person and character, they left behind

them only friends and admirers.

Years since (but names to me before),

Two sisters sought at eve my door;

Two song-birds wandering from their nest,

A gray old farm-house in the West.

How fresh of life the younger one,

Half smiles, half tears, like rain in sun!

Her gravest mood could scarce displace

The dimples of her nut-brown face.

Wit sparkled on her lips not less

For quick and tremulous tenderness;

And, following close her merriest glance,

Dreamed through her eyes the heart's romance.

Timid and still, the elder had

Even then a smile too sweetly sad;

The crown of pain that all must wear

Too early pressed her midnight hair.

Yet ere the summer eve grew long,

Her modest lips were sweet with song;

A memory haunted all her words

Of clover-fields and singing birds.

Her dark, dilating eyes expressed

The broad horizons of the west;

Her speech dropped prairie flowers; the gold

Of harvest wheat about her rolled.

Fore-doomed to song she seemed to me

I queried not with destiny

I knew the trial and the need,

Yet, all the more, I said, God speed?

What could I other than I did?

Could I a singing-bird forbid?

Deny the wind-stirred leaf? Rebuke

The music of the forest brook?

She went with morning from my door,

But left me richer than before;

Thenceforth I knew her voice of cheer,

The welcome of her partial ear.

Years passed: through all the land her name

A pleasant household word became

All felt behind the singer stood

A sweet and gracious womanhood.

Her life was earnest work, not play;

Her tired feet climbed a weary way;

And even through her lightest strain

We heard an undertone of pain.

Unseen of her her fair fame grew,

The good she did she rarely knew,

Unguessed of her in life the love

That rained its tears her grave above.

When last I saw her, full of peace,

She waited for her great release;

And that old friend so sage and bland,

Our later Franklin, held her hand.

For all that patriot bosoms stirs

Had moved that woman's heart of hers,

And men who toiled in storm and sun

Found her their meet companion.

Our converse, from her suffering bed

To healthful themes of life she led

The out-door world of bud and bloom

And light and sweetness filled her room.

Yet evermore an underthought

Of loss to come within us wrought,

And all the while we felt the strain

Of the strong will that conquered pain.

God giveth quietness at last!

The common way that all have passed

She went, with mortal yearnings fond,

To fuller life and love beyond.

Fold the rapt soul in your embrace,

My dear ones! Give the singer place

To you, to her,—I know not where,—

I lift the silence of a prayer.

For only thus our own we find;

The gone before, the left behind,

All mortal voices die between;

The unheard reaches the unseen.

Again the blackbirds sing; the streams

Wake, laughing, from their winter dreams,

And tremble in the April showers

The tassels of the maple flowers.

But not for her has spring renewed

The sweet surprises of the wood;

And bird and flower are lost to her

Who was their best interpreter.

What to shut eyes has God revealed?

What hear the ears that death has sealed?

What undreamed beauty passing show

Requites the loss of all we know?

O silent land, to which we move,

Enough if there alone be love,

And mortal need can ne'er outgrow

What it is waiting to bestow!

O white soul! from that far-off shore

Float some sweet song the waters o'er.

Our faith confirm, our fears dispel,

With the old voice we loved so well!

1871.

HOW MARY GREW.

These lines were in answer to an invitation to hear a lecture of

Mary Grew, of Philadelphia, before the Boston Radical Club. The

reference in the last stanza is to an essay on Sappho by T. W.

Higginson, read at the club the preceding month.

With wisdom far beyond her years,

And graver than her wondering peers,

So strong, so mild, combining still

The tender heart and queenly will,

To conscience and to duty true,

So, up from childhood, Mary Grew!

Then in her gracious womanhood

She gave her days to doing good.

She dared the scornful laugh of men,

The hounding mob, the slanderer's pen.

She did the work she found to do,—

A Christian heroine, Mary Grew!

The freed slave thanks her; blessing comes

To her from women's weary homes;

The wronged and erring find in her

Their censor mild and comforter.

The world were safe if but a few

Could grow in grace as Mary Grew!

So, New Year's Eve, I sit and say,

By this low wood-fire, ashen gray;

Just wishing, as the night shuts down,

That I could hear in Boston town,

In pleasant Chestnut Avenue,

From her own lips, how Mary Grew!

And hear her graceful hostess tell

The silver-voiced oracle

Who lately through her parlors spoke

As through Dodona's sacred oak,

A wiser truth than any told

By Sappho's lips of ruddy gold,—

The way to make the world anew,

Is just to grow—as Mary Grew

1871.

SUMNER

"I am not one who has disgraced beauty of sentiment by deformity of

conduct, or the maxims of a freeman by the actions of a slave; but,

by the grace of God, I have kept my life unsullied."

—MILTON'S
Defence of the People of England
.

O Mother State! the winds of March

Blew chill o'er Auburn's Field of God,

Where, slow, beneath a leaden arch

Of sky, thy mourning children trod.

And now, with all thy woods in leaf,

Thy fields in flower, beside thy dead

Thou sittest, in thy robes of grief,

A Rachel yet uncomforted!

And once again the organ swells,

Once more the flag is half-way hung,

And yet again the mournful bells

In all thy steeple-towers are rung.

And I, obedient to thy will,

Have come a simple wreath to lay,

Superfluous, on a grave that still

Is sweet with all the flowers of May.

I take, with awe, the task assigned;

It may be that my friend might miss,

In his new sphere of heart and mind,

Some token from my band in this.

By many a tender memory moved,

Along the past my thought I send;

The record of the cause he loved

Is the best record of its friend.

No trumpet sounded in his ear,

He saw not Sinai's cloud and flame,

But never yet to Hebrew seer

A clearer voice of duty came.

God said: "Break thou these yokes; undo

These heavy burdens. I ordain

A work to last thy whole life through,

A ministry of strife and pain.

"Forego thy dreams of lettered ease,

Put thou the scholar's promise by,

The rights of man are more than these."

He heard, and answered: "Here am I!"

He set his face against the blast,

His feet against the flinty shard,

Till the hard service grew, at last,

Its own exceeding great reward.

Lifted like Saul's above the crowd,

Upon his kingly forehead fell

The first sharp bolt of Slavery's cloud,

Launched at the truth he urged so well.

Ah! never yet, at rack or stake,

Was sorer loss made Freedom's gain,

Than his, who suffered for her sake

The beak-torn Titan's lingering pain!

The fixed star of his faith, through all

Loss, doubt, and peril, shone the same;

As through a night of storm, some tall,

Strong lighthouse lifts its steady flame.

Beyond the dust and smoke he saw

The sheaves of Freedom's large increase,

The holy fanes of equal law,

The New Jerusalem of peace.

The weak might fear, the worldling mock,

The faint and blind of heart regret;

All knew at last th' eternal rock

On which his forward feet were set.

The subtlest scheme of compromise

Was folly to his purpose bold;

The strongest mesh of party lies

Weak to the simplest truth he told.

One language held his heart and lip,

Straight onward to his goal he trod,

And proved the highest statesmanship

Obedience to the voice of God.

No wail was in his voice,—none heard,

When treason's storm-cloud blackest grew,

The weakness of a doubtful word;

His duty, and the end, he knew.

The first to smite, the first to spare;

When once the hostile ensigns fell,

He stretched out hands of generous care

To lift the foe he fought so well.

For there was nothing base or small

Or craven in his soul's broad plan;

Forgiving all things personal,

He hated only wrong to man.

The old traditions of his State,

The memories of her great and good,

Took from his life a fresher date,

And in himself embodied stood.

How felt the greed of gold and place,

The venal crew that schemed and planned,

The fine scorn of that haughty face,

The spurning of that bribeless hand!

If than Rome's tribunes statelier

He wore his senatorial robe,

His lofty port was all for her,

The one dear spot on all the globe.

If to the master's plea he gave

The vast contempt his manhood felt,

He saw a brother in the slave,—

With man as equal man he dealt.

Proud was he? If his presence kept

Its grandeur wheresoe'er he trod,

As if from Plutarch's gallery stepped

The hero and the demigod,

None failed, at least, to reach his ear,

Nor want nor woe appealed in vain;

The homesick soldier knew his cheer,

And blessed him from his ward of pain.

Safely his dearest friends may own

The slight defects he never hid,

The surface-blemish in the stone

Of the tall, stately pyramid.

Suffice it that he never brought

His conscience to the public mart;

But lived himself the truth he taught,

White-souled, clean-handed, pure of heart.

What if he felt the natural pride

Of power in noble use, too true

With thin humilities to hide

The work he did, the lore he knew?

Was he not just? Was any wronged

By that assured self-estimate?

He took but what to him belonged,

Unenvious of another's state.

Well might he heed the words he spake,

And scan with care the written page

Through which he still shall warm and wake

The hearts of men from age to age.

Ah! who shall blame him now because

He solaced thus his hours of pain!

Should not the o'erworn thresher pause,

And hold to light his golden grain?

No sense of humor dropped its oil

On the hard ways his purpose went;

Small play of fancy lightened toil;

He spake alone the thing he meant.

He loved his books, the Art that hints

A beauty veiled behind its own,

The graver's line, the pencil's tints,

The chisel's shape evoked from stone.

He cherished, void of selfish ends,

The social courtesies that bless

And sweeten life, and loved his friends

With most unworldly tenderness.

But still his tired eyes rarely learned

The glad relief by Nature brought;

Her mountain ranges never turned

His current of persistent thought.

The sea rolled chorus to his speech

Three-banked like Latium's' tall trireme,

With laboring oars; the grove and beach

Were Forum and the Academe.

The sensuous joy from all things fair

His strenuous bent of soul repressed,

And left from youth to silvered hair

Few hours for pleasure, none for rest.

For all his life was poor without,

O Nature, make the last amends

Train all thy flowers his grave about,

And make thy singing-birds his friends!

Revive again, thou summer rain,

The broken turf upon his bed

Breathe, summer wind, thy tenderest strain

Of low, sweet music overhead!

With calm and beauty symbolize

The peace which follows long annoy,

And lend our earth-bent, mourning eyes,

Some hint of his diviner joy.

For safe with right and truth he is,

As God lives he must live alway;

There is no end for souls like his,

No night for children of the day!

Nor cant nor poor solicitudes

Made weak his life's great argument;

Small leisure his for frames and moods

Who followed Duty where she went.

The broad, fair fields of God he saw

Beyond the bigot's narrow bound;

The truths he moulded into law

In Christ's beatitudes he found.

His state-craft was the Golden Rule,

His right of vote a sacred trust;

Clear, over threat and ridicule,

All heard his challenge: "Is it just?"

And when the hour supreme had come,

Not for himself a thought he gave;

In that last pang of martyrdom,

His care was for the half-freed slave.

Not vainly dusky hands upbore,

In prayer, the passing soul to heaven

Whose mercy to His suffering poor

Was service to the Master given.

Long shall the good State's annals tell,

Her children's children long be taught,

How, praised or blamed, he guarded well

The trust he neither shunned nor sought.

If for one moment turned thy face,

O Mother, from thy son, not long

He waited calmly in his place

The sure remorse which follows wrong.

Forgiven be the State he loved

The one brief lapse, the single blot;

Forgotten be the stain removed,

Her righted record shows it not!

The lifted sword above her shield

With jealous care shall guard his fame;

The pine-tree on her ancient field

To all the winds shall speak his name.

The marble image of her son

Her loving hands shall yearly crown,

And from her pictured Pantheon

His grand, majestic face look down.

O State so passing rich before,

Who now shall doubt thy highest claim?

The world that counts thy jewels o'er

Shall longest pause at Sumner's name!

1874.

THEIRS

I.

Fate summoned, in gray-bearded age, to act

A history stranger than his written fact,

Him who portrayed the splendor and the gloom

Of that great hour when throne and altar fell

With long death-groan which still is audible.

He, when around the walls of Paris rung

The Prussian bugle like the blast of doom,

And every ill which follows unblest war

Maddened all France from Finistere to Var,

The weight of fourscore from his shoulders flung,

And guided Freedom in the path he saw

Lead out of chaos into light and law,

Peace, not imperial, but republican,

And order pledged to all the Rights of Man.

II.

Death called him from a need as imminent

As that from which the Silent William went

When powers of evil, like the smiting seas

On Holland's dikes, assailed her liberties.

Sadly, while yet in doubtful balance hung

The weal and woe of France, the bells were rung

For her lost leader. Paralyzed of will,

Above his bier the hearts of men stood still.

Then, as if set to his dead lips, the horn

Of Roland wound once more to rouse and warn,

The old voice filled the air! His last brave word

Not vainly France to all her boundaries stirred.

Strong as in life, he still for Freedom wrought,

As the dead Cid at red Toloso fought.

1877.

FITZ-GREENE HALLECK.

AT THE UNVEILING OF HIS STATUE.

Among their graven shapes to whom

Thy civic wreaths belong,

O city of his love, make room

For one whose gift was song.

Not his the soldier's sword to wield,

Nor his the helm of state,

Nor glory of the stricken field,

Nor triumph of debate.

In common ways, with common men,

He served his race and time

As well as if his clerkly pen

Had never danced to rhyme.

If, in the thronged and noisy mart,

The Muses found their son,

Could any say his tuneful art

A duty left undone?

He toiled and sang; and year by year

Men found their homes more sweet,

And through a tenderer atmosphere

Looked down the brick-walled street.

The Greek's wild onset gall Street knew;

The Red King walked Broadway;

And Alnwick Castle's roses blew

From Palisades to Bay.

Fair City by the Sea! upraise

His veil with reverent hands;

And mingle with thy own the praise

And pride of other lands.

Let Greece his fiery lyric breathe

Above her hero-urns;

And Scotland, with her holly, wreathe

The flower he culled for Burns.

Oh, stately stand thy palace walls,

Thy tall ships ride the seas;

To-day thy poet's name recalls

A prouder thought than these.

Not less thy pulse of trade shall beat,

Nor less thy tall fleets swim,

That shaded square and dusty street

Are classic ground through him.

Alive, he loved, like all who sing,

The echoes of his song;

Too late the tardy meed we bring,

The praise delayed so long.

Too late, alas! Of all who knew

The living man, to-day

Before his unveiled face, how few

Make bare their locks of gray!

Our lips of praise must soon be dumb,

Our grateful eyes be dim;

O brothers of the days to come,

Take tender charge of him!

New hands the wires of song may sweep,

New voices challenge fame;

But let no moss of years o'ercreep

The lines of Halleck's name.

1877.

WILLIAM FRANCIS BARTLETT.

Oh, well may Essex sit forlorn

Beside her sea-blown shore;

Her well beloved, her noblest born,

Is hers in life no more!

No lapse of years can render less

Her memory's sacred claim;

No fountain of forgetfulness

Can wet the lips of Fame.

A grief alike to wound and heal,

A thought to soothe and pain,

The sad, sweet pride that mothers feel

To her must still remain.

Good men and true she has not lacked,

And brave men yet shall be;

The perfect flower, the crowning fact,

Of all her years was he!

As Galahad pure, as Merlin sage,

What worthier knight was found

To grace in Arthur's golden age

The fabled Table Round?

A voice, the battle's trumpet-note,

To welcome and restore;

A hand, that all unwilling smote,

To heal and build once more;

A soul of fire, a tender heart

Too warm for hate, he knew

The generous victor's graceful part

To sheathe the sword he drew.

When Earth, as if on evil dreams,

Looks back upon her wars,

And the white light of Christ outstreams

From the red disk of Mars,

His fame who led the stormy van

Of battle well may cease,

But never that which crowns the man

Whose victory was Peace.

Mourn, Essex, on thy sea-blown shore

Thy beautiful and brave,

Whose failing hand the olive bore,

Whose dying lips forgave!

Let age lament the youthful chief,

And tender eyes be dim;

The tears are more of joy than grief

That fall for one like him!

1878.

BAYARD TAYLOR.

I.

"And where now, Bayard, will thy footsteps tend?"

My sister asked our guest one winter's day.

Smiling he answered in the Friends' sweet way

Common to both: "Wherever thou shall send!

What wouldst thou have me see for thee?" She laughed,

Her dark eyes dancing in the wood-fire's glow

"Loffoden isles, the Kilpis, and the low,

Unsetting sun on Finmark's fishing-craft."

"All these and more I soon shall see for thee!"

He answered cheerily: and he kept his pledge

On Lapland snows, the North Cape's windy wedge,

And Tromso freezing in its winter sea.

He went and came. But no man knows the  track

Of his last journey, and he comes not back!

II.

He brought us wonders of the new and old;

We shared all climes with him. The Arab's tent

To him its story-telling secret lent.

And, pleased, we listened to the tales he told.

His task, beguiled with songs that shall endure,

In manly, honest thoroughness he wrought;

From humble home-lays to the heights of thought

Slowly he climbed, but every step was sure.

How, with the generous pride that friendship hath,

We, who so loved him, saw at last the crown

Of civic honor on his brows pressed down,

Rejoiced, and knew not that the gift was death.

And now for him, whose praise in deafened ears

Two nations speak, we answer but with tears!

III.

O Vale of Chester! trod by him so oft,

Green as thy June turf keep his memory. Let

Nor wood, nor dell, nor storied stream forget,

Nor winds that blow round lonely Cedarcroft;

Let the home voices greet him in the far,

Strange land that holds him; let the messages

Of love pursue him o'er the chartless seas

And unmapped vastness of his unknown star

Love's language, heard beyond the loud discourse

Of perishable fame, in every sphere

Itself interprets; and its utterance here

Somewhere in God's unfolding universe

Shall reach our traveller, softening the surprise

Of his rapt gaze on unfamiliar skies!

1879.

OUR AUTOCRAT.

Read at the breakfast given in honor of Dr. Holmes by the

publishers of the Atlantic Monthly, December 3, 1879.

His laurels fresh from song and lay,

Romance, art, science, rich in all,

And young of heart, how dare we say

We keep his seventieth festival?

No sense is here of loss or lack;

Before his sweetness and his light

The dial holds its shadow back,

The charmed hours delay their flight.

His still the keen analysis

Of men and moods, electric wit,

Free play of mirth, and tenderness

To heal the slightest wound from it.

And his the pathos touching all

Life's sins and sorrows and regrets,

Its hopes and fears, its final call

And rest beneath the violets.

His sparkling surface scarce betrays

The thoughtful tide beneath it rolled,

The wisdom of the latter days,

And tender memories of the old.

What shapes and fancies, grave or gay,

Before us at his bidding come

The Treadmill tramp, the One-Horse Shay,

The dumb despair of Elsie's doom!

The tale of Avis and the Maid,

The plea for lips that cannot speak,

The holy kiss that Iris laid

On Little Boston's pallid cheek!

Long may he live to sing for us

His sweetest songs at evening time,

And, like his Chambered Nautilus,

To holier heights of beauty climb,

Though now unnumbered guests surround

The table that he rules at will,

Its Autocrat, however crowned,

Is but our friend and comrade still.

The world may keep his honored name,

The wealth of all his varied powers;

A stronger claim has love than fame,

And he himself is only ours!

WITHIN THE GATE.

L. M. C.

I have more fully expressed my admiration and regard for Lydia

Maria Child in the biographical introduction which I wrote for the

volume of Letters, published after her death.

We sat together, last May-day, and talked

Of the dear friends who walked

Beside us, sharers of the hopes and fears

Of five and forty years,

Since first we met in Freedom's hope forlorn,

And heard her battle-horn

Sound through the valleys of the sleeping North,

Calling her children forth,

And youth pressed forward with hope-lighted eyes,

And age, with forecast wise

Of the long strife before the triumph won,

Girded his armor on.

Sadly, ass name by name we called the roll,

We heard the dead-bells toll

For the unanswering many, and we knew

The living were the few.

And we, who waited our own call before

The inevitable door,

Listened and looked, as all have done, to win

Some token from within.

No sign we saw, we heard no voices call;

The impenetrable wall

Cast down its shadow, like an awful doubt,

On all who sat without.

Of many a hint of life beyond the veil,

And many a ghostly tale

Wherewith the ages spanned the gulf between

The seen and the unseen,

Seeking from omen, trance, and dream to gain

Solace to doubtful pain,

And touch, with groping hands, the garment hem

Of truth sufficing them,

We talked; and, turning from the sore unrest

Of an all-baffling quest,

We thought of holy lives that from us passed

Hopeful unto the last,

As if they saw beyond the river of death,

Like Him of Nazareth,

The many mansions of the Eternal days

Lift up their gates of praise.

And, hushed to silence by a reverent awe,

Methought, O friend, I saw

In thy true life of word, and work, and thought

The proof of all we sought.

Did we not witness in the life of thee

Immortal prophecy?

And feel, when with thee, that thy footsteps trod

An everlasting road?

Not for brief days thy generous sympathies,

Thy scorn of selfish ease;

Not for the poor prize of an earthly goal

Thy strong uplift of soul.

Than thine was never turned a fonder heart

To nature and to art

In fair-formed Hellas in her golden prime,

Thy Philothea's time.

Yet, loving beauty, thou couldst pass it by,

And for the poor deny

Thyself, and see thy fresh, sweet flower of fame

Wither in blight and blame.

Sharing His love who holds in His embrace

The lowliest of our race,

Sure the Divine economy must be

Conservative of thee!

For truth must live with truth, self-sacrifice

Seek out its great allies;

Good must find good by gravitation sure,

And love with love endure.

And so, since thou hast passed within the gate

Whereby awhile I wait,

I give blind grief and blinder sense the lie

Thou hast not lived to die!

1881.

IN MEMORY.

JAMES T. FIELDS.

As a guest who may not stay

Long and sad farewells to say

Glides with smiling face away,

Of the sweetness and the zest

Of thy happy life possessed

Thou hast left us at thy best.

Warm of heart and clear of brain,

Of thy sun-bright spirit's wane

Thou hast spared us all the pain.

Now that thou hast gone away,

What is left of one to say

Who was open as the day?

What is there to gloss or shun?

Save with kindly voices none

Speak thy name beneath the sun.

Safe thou art on every side,

Friendship nothing finds to hide,

Love's demand is satisfied.

Over manly strength and worth,

At thy desk of toil, or hearth,

Played the lambent light of mirth,—

Mirth that lit, but never burned;

All thy blame to pity turned;

Hatred thou hadst never learned.

Every harsh and vexing thing

At thy home-fire lost its sting;

Where thou wast was always spring.

And thy perfect trust in good,

Faith in man and womanhood,

Chance and change and time, withstood.

Small respect for cant and whine,

Bigot's zeal and hate malign,

Had that sunny soul of thine.

But to thee was duty's claim

Sacred, and thy lips became

Reverent with one holy Name.

Therefore, on thy unknown way,

Go in God's peace! We who stay

But a little while delay.

Keep for us, O friend, where'er

Thou art waiting, all that here

Made thy earthly presence dear;

Something of thy pleasant past

On a ground of wonder cast,

In the stiller waters glassed!

Keep the human heart of thee;

Let the mortal only be

Clothed in immortality.

And when fall our feet as fell

Thine upon the asphodel,

Let thy old smile greet us well;

Proving in a world of bliss

What we fondly dream in this,—

Love is one with holiness!

1881.

WILSON

Read at the Massachusetts Club on the seventieth anniversary the

birthday of Vice-President Wilson, February 16, 1882.

The lowliest born of all the land,

He wrung from Fate's reluctant hand

The gifts which happier boyhood claims;

And, tasting on a thankless soil

The bitter bread of unpaid toil,

He fed his soul with noble aims.

And Nature, kindly provident,

To him the future's promise lent;

The powers that shape man's destinies,

Patience and faith and toil, he knew,

The close horizon round him grew,

Broad with great possibilities.

By the low hearth-fire's fitful blaze

He read of old heroic days,

The sage's thought, the patriot's speech;

Unhelped, alone, himself he taught,

His school the craft at which he wrought,

His lore the book within his, reach.

He felt his country's need; he knew

The work her children had to do;

And when, at last, he heard the call

In her behalf to serve and dare,

Beside his senatorial chair

He stood the unquestioned peer of all.

Beyond the accident of birth

He proved his simple manhood's worth;

Ancestral pride and classic grace

Confessed the large-brained artisan,

So clear of sight, so wise in plan

And counsel, equal to his place.

With glance intuitive he saw

Through all disguise of form and law,

And read men like an open book;

Fearless and firm, he never quailed

Nor turned aside for threats, nor failed

To do the thing he undertook.

How wise, how brave, he was, how well

He bore himself, let history tell

While waves our flag o'er land and sea,

No black thread in its warp or weft;

He found dissevered States, he left

A grateful Nation, strong and free!

THE POET AND THE CHILDREN.

LONGFELLOW.

WITH a glory of winter sunshine

Over his locks of gray,

In the old historic mansion

He sat on his last birthday;

With his books and his pleasant pictures,

And his household and his kin,

While a sound as of myriads singing

From far and near stole in.

It came from his own fair city,

From the prairie's boundless plain,

From the Golden Gate of sunset,

And the cedarn woods of Maine.

And his heart grew warm within him,

And his moistening eyes grew dim,

For he knew that his country's children

Were singing the songs of him,

The lays of his life's glad morning,

The psalms of his evening time,

Whose echoes shall float forever

On the winds of every clime.

All their beautiful consolations,

Sent forth like birds of cheer,

Came flocking back to his windows,

And sang in the Poet's ear.

Grateful, but solemn and tender,

The music rose and fell

With a joy akin to sadness

And a greeting like farewell.

With a sense of awe he listened

To the voices sweet and young;

The last of earth and the first of heaven

Seemed in the songs they sung.

And waiting a little longer

For the wonderful change to come,

He heard the Summoning Angel,

Who calls God's children home!

And to him in a holier welcome

Was the mystical meaning given

Of the words of the blessed Master

"Of such is the kingdom of heaven!"

1882

A WELCOME TO LOWELL

Take our hands, James Russell Lowell,

Our hearts are all thy own;

To-day we bid thee welcome

Not for ourselves alone.

In the long years of thy absence

Some of us have grown old,

And some have passed the portals

Of the Mystery untold;

For the hands that cannot clasp thee,

For the voices that are dumb,

For each and all I bid thee

A grateful welcome home!

For Cedarcroft's sweet singer

To the nine-fold Muses dear;

For the Seer the winding Concord

Paused by his door to hear;

For him, our guide and Nestor,

Who the march of song began,

The white locks of his ninety years

Bared to thy winds, Cape Ann!

For him who, to the music

Her pines and hemlocks played,

Set the old and tender story

Of the lorn Acadian maid;

For him, whose voice for freedom

Swayed friend and foe at will,

Hushed is the tongue of silver,

The golden lips are still!

For her whose life of duty

At scoff and menace smiled,

Brave as the wife of Roland,

Yet gentle as a Child.

And for him the three-hilled city

Shall hold in memory long,

Those name is the hint and token

Of the pleasant Fields of Song!

For the old friends unforgotten,

For the young thou hast not known,

I speak their heart-warm greeting;

Come back and take thy own!

From England's royal farewells,

And honors fitly paid,

Come back, dear Russell Lowell,

To Elmwood's waiting shade!

Come home with all the garlands

That crown of right thy head.

I speak for comrades living,

I speak for comrades dead!

AMESBURY, 6th mo., 1885.

AN ARTIST OF THE BEAUTIFUL.

GEORGE FULLER

Haunted of Beauty, like the marvellous youth

Who sang Saint Agnes' Eve! How passing fair

Her shapes took color in thy homestead air!

How on thy canvas even her dreams were truth!

Magician! who from commonest elements

Called up divine ideals, clothed upon

By mystic lights soft blending into one

Womanly grace and child-like innocence.

Teacher I thy lesson was not given in vain.

Beauty is goodness; ugliness is sin;

Art's place is sacred: nothing foul therein

May crawl or tread with bestial feet profane.

If rightly choosing is the painter's test,

Thy choice, O master, ever was the best.

1885.

MULFORD.

Author of The Nation and The Republic of God.

Unnoted as the setting of a star

He passed; and sect and party scarcely knew

When from their midst a sage and seer withdrew

To fitter audience, where the great dead are

In God's republic of the heart and mind,

Leaving no purer, nobler soul behind.

1886.

TO A CAPE ANN SCHOONER

Luck to the craft that bears this name of mine,

Good fortune follow with her golden spoon

The glazed hat and tarry pantaloon;

And wheresoe'er her keel shall cut the brine,

Cod, hake and haddock quarrel for her line.

Shipped with her crew, whatever wind may blow,

Or tides delay, my wish with her shall go,

Fishing by proxy. Would that it might show

At need her course, in lack of sun and star,

Where icebergs threaten, and the sharp reefs are;

Lift the blind fog on Anticosti's lee

And Avalon's rock; make populous the sea

Round Grand Manan with eager finny swarms,

Break the long calms, and charm away the storms.

OAK KNOLL, 23 3rd mo., 1886.

SAMUEL J. TILDEN.

GREYSTONE, AUG. 4, 1886.

Once more, O all-adjusting Death!

The nation's Pantheon opens wide;

Once more a common sorrow saith

A strong, wise man has died.

Faults doubtless had he. Had we not

Our own, to question and asperse

The worth we doubted or forgot

Until beside his hearse?

Ambitious, cautious, yet the man

To strike down fraud with resolute hand;

A patriot, if a partisan,

He loved his native land.

So let the mourning bells be rung,

The banner droop its folds half way,

And while the public pen and tongue

Their fitting tribute pay,

Shall we not vow above his bier

To set our feet on party lies,

And wound no more a living ear

With words that Death denies?

1886

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSONAL POEMS II ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at
www.gutenberg.org
. If you
are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit
www.gutenberg.org/donate
.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility:
www.gutenberg.org
.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.